The flat box they passed to Iffy opened to reveal
four squares woven from fractal carbon fiber,
each the size of her nature book but no thicker than half a dozen of its pages.
It took her a second to realize that
the grommets patterned across the squares were rotors,
and that each square was some kind of flexible dronelet.
She turned one over in her hands.
"Dunno," she admitted.
"How d'you switch it on?"

"No idea," Honesty's First said cheerfully.
"Best guess is they was fer some kinda game."

"Shaw," their Second scoffed,
looking up from the machine they had spent the last three days trying to clean and reassemble.
"They's too fine jarra game.
I's fer they bin up some kinda survey mappin' back along fer the Ecologists."

"Mebbe," Honesty's First admitted.
Casually,
looking past Iffy rather than at her,
they asked,
"You ain't got fray notions?"

Iffy shook her head.
She had told Honesty about her occasional flashes of insight,
then rounded on them cold and hard when she learned that
her friend had relayed what she'd said to their First and Second.
"We don't keep secrets on achother," Honesty had said with a shrug.
"Y'ain't aright along that, best we part ways now."
So Iffy had forgiven them,
secretly relieved that they didn't seem to care that Iffy was different.

When Iffy handed back the box of dronelets,
Honesty's First waved her away.
"Not much use t'us if we can't turn 'em on," they said,
though Iffy knew the little rotors would be worth a meal
if they were pried out and sold as parts.
"Anythin' comes t' mind, you come by an' gi's a scutch, aright?
An' even if nothin' does,
we's alluz happy t'have one more fer dinner or a sleepover."
They winked broadly.

"Thanks," Iffy mumbled.
Her upbringing had taught her how to rig sails in heavy weather
and mend engines older than her foster parents
but not what to do when people were kind to her.
She drained the last of her tea.
"I oughta get back t Aunt Naggie an th shoppin."

"Sure," Honesty said.
"But you come along by that dinner, aye?"
De poked Iffy in the ribs.
"Y' maw skinny."

Iffy blushed.
"I'll ask," she said, mumbling again.

Honesty hooked der arm through Iffy's again.
"Bonza. I walk you out."

They held hands all the way up the canal.
As usual,
Honesty did most of the talking.
Induction wouldn't be so bad—the Marines needed people with tech skills
the same as everyone else,
so they'd prolly put der to work doing that.
De knew tons more about salvage and repair than any crufty old core,
and what de didn't know de could ask Iffy,
right?

"I s'pose," Iffy allowed.

"Oh c'mon."
Honesty bumped der hip against Iffy's.
"First and Uncle Osman 'long by Pier Nine
asked two different cores about that pump they conned you.
They neither had a siggy what it was,
an' you jus' come right out an' tell 'em.
The stuff you have in your head," de finished admiringly,
shaking der own in wonder.

*I'd feel better about it if I knew how it got there,* Iffy thought.
For the thousandth time she wondered
if her clone parents had been able to do what she could,
and if so,
whether they had thought of it as a gift or a burden.
And for the thousandth time,
she wished she could ask them.

They said goodbye by the bow of the Marine cutter.
One of the repair bots paused a moment to watch them kiss,
its simple-minded core wondering who was repairing whom,
then erased the thought as Iffy turned back toward the Dance Hall.

By the time Iffy got to the market
the streets around it were the most crowded place in Antarctica.
Indonesian Mormons handed out glossy animated pamphlets
advertising their church's insurance policies,
smiling forgiveness at a ragged man yelling that the Singularity had come,
they were all living in a simulation,
the data proved it,
they just had to look at the data and they would see the truth!
A bot with a rasping voice and an ancient plastic mask for a face
told stories to a circle of wide-eyed children,
their parents happy to spend a pence apiece for a few moments of rest.
Its cut-out paper puppets danced
as Zuko proclaimed his love for Princess Leia
while his boyfriend Aang raced to free Elsa from the Terminator.
Two bald women who might have been twins but were probably just clones
wheeled a cartful of tweaked moss blankets
past two men arguing beside another cart piled high with curved sheets of spun glass
that cast crisp rainbows on the ground.
The smell of soy being fried in ginger
mixed with the wet steamy warmth from rice cookers,
the salty tang of seaweed soup,
and the heavy mug of people who spent most of their lives wrapped in warm clothing.

Iffy paused in front of a stall selling rats with startling blue eyes.
"They make great pets. Or snacks!" the man said,
hastily adding, "Just kidding! Just kidding!"
when Iffy scowled at him.
"Watch!"
He leaned over and said, "Ratty wanna cracker?"

"Idjit!" the rat squeaked back. "Yer an idjit!"

"See?" the man said proudly.
"You can teach 'em a coupla hunnert words, easy!"

"I know," Iffy said wistfully, a sudden pang in her heart.
She held her finger in front of one of the cages.
The rat sniffed at it.
"Idjit," it pronounced in its tiny squeaky voice,
just like the one she remembered.

*One day*,
Iffy promised herself as she straightened up and hurried on her way.
One day,
when she had a workshop of her own and she could keep whatever pets and plants she wanted
and Honesty could come by all the time.
(Even in her daydreams,
she didn't imagine that they would live together.)
One day—but not today.

The Dance Hall was just as busy inside as out.
Iffy tried slipping through the crush the way Honesty somehow did,
then gave up and surrendered herself to the flow of the crowd.
She had never been swimming,
but she imagined this was what it was like to be caught in a strong current.

She glanced up as a drone the size of her hand whined by,
its crystal eyes scanning the crowd.
"Some all got they riled up," a stall keeper muttered, noticing Iffy's look.
"They 'long by all place today.
You t'ink it come by they fight up along th' gov'nor's?"

"I dunno," Iffy said.
Drones had microphones as well as cameras,
and the last thing she wanted was
some stray word of hers catching the governor's attention.
"'Scuse me."
She ducked under a tarnished video carpet hanging from a clothesline
and pushed her way into the crowd on the other side.

And froze in disbelief.
And ducked back behind the video carpet and squeezed her eyes shut.
She *couldn't* have seen what she thought she just saw.
She shook her head and peeked around the carpet's edge.

There, just a couple of meters away,
stood Aunt Naggie
and a trim Asian man wearing a frayed jacket
in the brown and gray of the old Ecological Corps.
Iffy couldn't hear what they were saying over the bustle of the crowd,
but from the way they were looking into each others' eyes
she was pretty sure they weren't discussing topsoil formation.

The ecologist handed Aunt Naggie something.
As he leaned forward to kiss her cheek,
the space above their heads flickered.
It was another video carpet,
Iffy realized,
strung between four posts like a canopy
to conceal them from any cameras or drones overhead.
It flickered again as Aunt Naggie pulled the ecologist closer
and kissed him for real.

Iffy's stomach flip-flopped
the way it did when she read played of the steamier passages
in Aunt Naggie's romance sims.
The ecologist stepped back,
a bland smile replacing the genuine warmth of a moment before.
He gestured at one of the carpets hanging on a display rack beside him.
"Perhaps this one?" he asked a little too loudly.

Aunt Naggie's reply was cut off by a sudden crackle of static.
"Citizens!"
The melodious mechanical voice cut through the market bustle.
"Remain where you are!
There is no cause for alarm!
This safety notice is brought to you by Volkov's Hot Sauce!"

An alarm began to ping, then another.
Someone shouted, "Blues!" 
Iffy spun around.
A squad of Marines in exoskeletons had appeared at the entrance,
visors down and shock sticks in their hands.

"Citizens!
Remain where you are!
The situation will be resolved shortly!
While you wait, try Volkov's—there's nothing hotter this side of the Cairo Crater!"
The drone above Iffy jinked sideways to dodge a thrown scrap of bamboo.
Something clanged off a Marine's exoskeleton.
Someone shouted,
"Show us yer warrant 'r show us your backside!"
Other voices took up the cry.
"Show us yer warrant!"

*Great,* Iffy thought despairingly,
*Another affin' dock jammer.*
She pulled aside the carpet she had been hiding behind
and plowed straight into her foster mother.

"Iffy?" Aunt Naggie gasped. "What're you doin' here?"

"Came lookin' for you," Iffy said breathlessly.
She nodded at the ecologist.
"G'day. I'm Iffy."

"Fifth Ang Kwan," he said, bowing slightly.
"It's a pleasure a meet you.
Nagatha has told me as much o you."

"Hasn't told me nothin' about *you*," Iffy said,
immediately regretting her attempt to be flippant.

But the ecologist smiled.
"That's prolly a the best."

"Iffy, you ain't supposed to be here!" Aunt Naggie said helplessly.
"You're supposed to be down along th docks with ya friend!"

"I was," Iffy protested.

"Citizens!" the drone bellowed.
"A warrant is being procured.
Remain in your present positions!
Do not indulge in pointless vandalism!
And whether you're having a late breakfast or an early lunch,
put some Volkov's on it!"

Something fell over with a crash.
"What's goin on?" Iffy asked.

The ecologist put his hand on Aunt Naggie's arm.
"You should go, Na.
Now."

Aunt Naggie took the ecologist's hand in hers.
"They ain't lookin a me.
An if it's you,
you gotta be some else than here,
so I ain't goin anywhere less you are."

"Stubborn woman," the ecologist said,
but he smiled as he said it.
He pulled an orange knit cap out of one pocket and pulled it down low over his ears,
then fished a flimsy oval of plastic out of another pocket and pressed it onto his face.
The plastic flickered.
Suddenly a different man was standing there,
one with a heavier jaw and wider cheekbones.

The ecologist slipped off his jacket and turned it inside out
to reveal a purple paisley pattern
that had briefly and unfortunately been popular ten years before.
He put it back on and smiled at Aunt Naggie.
"Well? Would you let such  take you dancin?"

"Stop with yer jokin," she scolded,
glancing fearfully toward the entrance
as the chants of "Warrant! Warrant! Warrant!" grew louder and angrier.

"Citizens!
Remain calm!
We shall soon be operating with full legal authority!
Do not interfere!
And remember: Volkov's, because good food hurts!"

Another crash from the entrance
was followed by the sizzle and crack of a shock stick.
The ecologist swore.
"Go long by Alphabet Street," he ordered.
"Don't run, but don't stop neither."

"What a you?" Aunt Naggie demanded.

"Safer a we split up,
the ecologist said,
glancing at Iffy.
"I'll go long by the back way an see you where I saw you a first time."
He grinned and kissed her quickly.
"We can get a cuppa.
Now go."

*That ain't gonna work,* Iffy thought.
The drones overhead weren't allowed to be any smarter than seagulls,
but even something that dumb could recognize the way someone walked,
and the ecologist's face mask wouldn't conceal that.
If any of the drones caught a glimpse of them—

—and there it was.
How could she not have seen it before?
"Wait!"
Iffy pulled the box that Honesty's First had given her out from under her coat.
She had never been able to control her flashes of intuition,
but they had never been wrong either.

She knelt on the market floor and opened the box.
There and there together and then there,
two presses and a third, and *zip!*
A thin film in the center of the dronelet peeled back to reveal a foil battery,
a hair-thin fractal antenna,
and—

"*Shway boo*," she whispered unbelievingly.
The flat, unreflective black surface of the dronelet's core told Iffy that
it had been fabbed in orbit.
This was old tech—wartime old or older.

"Iffy, what're you doin?"
She ignored her foster mother and the alarms
and the pressure of the ecologist's stare
as she pulled tools out of her waistbelt.

"You got any scraps o' video this big?"
she asked over her shoulder,
holding her hands a few centimeters apart.

"Here."
The ecologist handed her half a dozen swatches of video fabric,
each the size of a handkerchief.
Iffy measured one against a dronelet,
then winced as she pried two of the rotors out of the stiff black fabric.
She'd never be able to repair the damage,
not even with the kind of tech she'd seen in Wales' toolboxes,
but she didn't dare cutting into the dronelet fabric itself.

It took her a moment to tuck the corners of the video square into the holes she'd made.
Now for the hard part.
She closed her eyes and willed the images to come together.
These bits were the dronelets—don't worry now
about how she knew or why she could see its programming
as clearly as she could see its hardware—and this over here was the video square.
*That* was its connection to the outside world,
so if she shone a laser *here* to send a pulse-coded access request,
then told the dronelet and the video square to trust each other no matter what their other programming said,
then—

"Gotcha!"
The dronelet rose, tilted, and levelled
as the image on its back flickered and steadied to show the top of a woman's head.

The ecologist grunted.
"She really can do it, can't she?" he said to Aunt Naggie.

Iffy's foster mother nodded.
"Y'aright?" she asked Iffy.

"I'm fine," Iffy lied.
Her head was swimming.
Everything around her seemed unreal.
The stalls were just wireframes.
Her dronelets were clouds of software,
patched and patched again to defend against viruses
until there was only room for the most limited intelligence,
but Aunt Naggie and the ecologist were dense clouds of history
stretching away in a direction that wasn't really a direction.
It was like something out of a badly-written sim.

"Iffy!" Aunt Naggie shook her.
The world blinked back to normal.
"Iffy, c'mon, we gotta go."

"Just a second!"
Eighty-five seconds later
two more awkward patch-ups hummed quietly in the air beside her.
She took a deep breath and transmitted one last set of instructions.

The patches of video fabric flickered.
The images solidified to show top-down views of Iffy, Aunt Naggie,
and someone whom she hoped looked enough like the ecologist to convince a drone.
"Start walkin'," she ordered the two adults.
"Just a coupla steps. Aright, that's enough."
*I hope,* she added to herself.

She strung a few more commands together and threw them into the dronelets' cores.
They began to sway slightly in an unconvincing imitation of
the way people moved when walking.
"Which way's Alphabet Street?" she asked muzzily.
Her tongue felt like a piece of uncooked soy
and she was pretty sure that if she turned her head too quickly she'd throw up.

A few moments later the dronelets were on their way north
with (Iffy hoped) the drones on their trail.
She, Aunt Naggie, and the ecologist hurried in the opposite direction.
As they turned left by a rack of bicycles and a stall selling rolls of microfiber sailcloth,
a man in front of them asked,
"Ya think they trappa thief?"

"Hell says they sweepin fer a sab,"
the woman beside him replied,
scanning a feed only she could see through heavy yellow-tinted glasses.

Her companion snorted.
"Bad case o someone din't pay off the blues is more likely."
His companion shushed him.

Even as she did so the drones above boomed,
"Citizens!
We have obtained the warrant you requested!
It's as fresh as Volkov's Number Two hot sauce!"
Every screen in the Dance Hall blanked for an instant
and then came back to life showing a younger version of the ecologist.
Instead of a suit,
he wore the green and gold uniform of the Brazilian Defense Co-operative.

"You're a Zillion?" Iffy gasped.

The ecologist pulled his arm out of Aunt Naggie's.
"Keep walkin," he ordered,
yanking the orange knit cap off his head.
Without waiting for a reply he turned right toward a stall
selling animated toys and compact ship-board cooking equipment.

A pair of Marines stepped out from behind it.
One raised a shock stick as the other levelled a tangle gun.
"Citizen! Halt!" they said in unison.

"Este mundo é de deus!" the ecologist yelled.
He threw himself to the side,
tossing his cap into the air.
It exploded into a cloud of orange twinkles
just as the Marine's tangle gun burped a web of sticky plastic microfibers.
People shrieked as the shot went wide,
the gun's auto-sight dazzled by the ecologist's counter-measures.

The couple in front of Iffy and Aunt Naggie fell to the ground,
shouting and struggling as the sticky plastic tightened around them.
The ecologist vaulted over a counter-top,
knocked aside a wok full of steaming noodlesf,
and pulled up short
as another pair of Marines clanked around the corner to block his way.

"Iffy, c'mon, we gotta go!" Aunt Naggie tugged her arm.

Iffy shook her off, tapping frantically at her keypad.
There!
Her three dronelets zipped through the air straight for the Marines.
The soldiers spun around,
their inducted reflexes pulling their weapons up in the face of an unknown new threat
just long enough for the ecologist to look wildly around for another way out.

But there wasn't one.
Two—no, three—of the Marines' drones buzzed overhead
as a Marine chambered another stubby canister in his tangle gun.

The ecologist made a fist and pressed it against his temple.
Aunt Naggie shrieked "no!"
The lights around them flickered.
The ecologist's head snapped back.
He collapsed like a puppet whose strings had been cut.

Iffy gaped in disbelief.
He had brainwiped himself!
Spies and disappointed lovers did it in sims, but this was real life!
People didn't scramble their brains in real life!

Aunt Naggie made a strangled sound
as the Marines swarmed the twitching form on the ground.
Iffy took her arm.
"Auntie!"
She tugged at her gently.
"Auntie, we need a be outta here."

"I can't…" Shock and disbelief mingled on her face.
"I can't just leave he."

"Auntie, we gotta."
Iffy took one of the shopping bags from her foster mother's slack grip
and pulled her forward.

Everyone was pushing toward the exit.
Each time someone bumped into them
Iffy was sure she was about to feel a hand come down on her shoulder,
but somehow they made it to the doors.

Iffy pulled her foster mother to the side and tapped one final command.
The three dronelets reappeared a few moments later.
Iffy tore off the video fabric off them and stuffed them back in their box.
"C'mon," she told Aunt Naggie.
"Let's a home."

Aunt Naggie nodded without speaking.
They turned a corner, then another, and then Aunt Naggie pulled up short.
"I'm sorry, sweetie," she said,
wiping her eyes.
"I'm sorry.
I just gotta…"
Her shoulders shook as she wept,
hopeless and silent.

"Hush now," Iffy said awkwardly.
"Who was he?"

"Sh!" Aunt Naggie glanced around fearfully.
"Not out here."

"But—"

"Later!"
Aunt Naggie sniffled and wiped her eyes one more time before straightening up wearily.
"Come on," she said, the weight of a lifetime in her voice.
"We already late a getti' back."

Uncle Jack had worked himself into a smoldering rage by the time they reached the *Guinevere*.
"Can't make up or down o what he's done a things,"
he snarled by way of a hello,
wiping his hands angrily on a greasy rag.
A double dozen boxes sat in a pile on deck,
each bearing the Marines' blue crown stamp.
One had been torn open to reveal strips of plastic for patching seams in the hull,
another to show a fitting for a bilge pump that hadn't worked properly in years.
It was more new parts than the old jelly dredger had seen since before Iffy first set foot on her,
but all Uncle Jack could talk about was
how the repairs that Wales had made weren't how things ought to be done,
it looked like core work,
he was tweaked somehow,
and how were regular folks supposed to understand a tangle like that?

"Maybe it'll make more sense 'long dinner," Aunt Naggie said tiredly.

"Fat that," Uncle Jack snorted. "Didja get your precious grocies?"

*Thump.*
Iffy jumped as the bag came down on the table.
Aunt Naggie began to empty it and stow the vegetables without saying a word.
After a moment her husband muttered a curse and left.

Iffy watched silently as Aunt Naggie took out her feelings on an onion.
Once it was diced and sizzling in hot oil
she cubed a block of soy and attacked the other vegetables.
"Anythin I can do?" Iffy asked,
worried and afraid and wanting to help but not knowing how.

Aunt Naggie swept the carrots and cabbage into the frying pan and forced a smile.
"Thanks, sweetie, but I'm aright.
You should prolly go topside an try to clean up whatever mess he made o Mister Wales' work."

Iffy stood and put her arms around the woman
who had sheltered her from storms of all kinds for most of her life.
"I love you," she blurted.

Aunt Naggie set her knife down and hugged her foster daughter back.
"I love you too, sweetie," she said softly.
"Always an forever.
Don't you ever forget that."

Iffy hung on when her foster mother would have let go.
"Was he—was he someone special?"

Aunt Naggie kissed the top of Iffy's shaven head.
"Yeah. In a lot o ways."
She laughed shakily.
"Prolly best if we don't talk about he in front o Jack, aright?"

"Course not," Iffy agreed.
"But—why'd he—you know. Why'd he do it?"
*Why did he think he had to keep you safe?* she added in her head.
*Why do you know people who would do something like that?
Why didn't I know you did?*

"Lotta people dependin on he," Aunt Naggie said distantly,
straightening up and turning back to her cooking.
"I guess he thought it was th only way he could keep em all safe."

- Hey.
- *Ho.*
- Huh?
- *Hoot!*
- Stop it ya dingus.

Iff smiled.
Any night she could get Honesty to call her "dingus" was a good night.

- Y'aright? We heard a cravvicked the Dance Hall.
- *Yeah.* Iffy hesitated. *Saw it happen.*
- Tay bangle. Y'aright for reals?
- *Yeah.* Iffy hesitated again. *How bout you? Tomorrow n all.*
- Aff, I be kappa. But Second says I gotta go do chores. You be safe.
- *You too.*

She waited a moment for a reply,
wishing as she always did that people didn't always have to go so soon.
When none came,
she set her app aside,
pulled out her nature book,
tossed it aside,
and then set one of the mysterious dronelets on her mattress and went to work.

A hour later she sat back, defeated.
They had understood standard commands back in the Dance Hall,
but when she tried probing them electronically,
her homemade wireshark showed nothing but frazzled gibberish.
She yawned and packed the dronelet back in its box,
then waved her light off.

*She was on deck.
The sky was a perfect blue and Aunt Naggie was stuffing her into her ecosuit.
"Just in case, love," she said.*

*No, Iffy thought, and, "No!" she said.
She wasn't going to go through this again.
She struggled to pull her arms out of the ecosuit.*

*"It's kappa," Honesty said, already in theirs.
"It's kappa, sweetie, everythin's gonna be kappa.
We're gonna __make__ it kappa. You'll see."
With a barely perceptible whir
their head detached from the rest of their body and rose into the air.
Beneath them,
the sea began to boil and churn.
Iffy grabbed hold of Aunt Naggie's leg and held on tight
as the deck dropped away below her and she fell into waking.*

"Iffy! Iffy, wake up!"
Why was Aunt Naggie shaking her?
And why did her head hurt so much?
"Iffy!"

"Wuzza?" she mumbled.
She tried to sit up.
No.
That was a mistake.
She tried to tell whoever was shaking her to stop,
it made the stabbing pain behind her eyes worse,
but someone had replaced her tongue with a slab of sour tofu.
All she could do was whimper.

"Iffy, please."
Strong hands that smelled faintly of soap and onions forced her jaws apart.
She gagged as a finger pushed something dry and powdery into her mouth.
It tasted spicy,
which made just as little sense as everything else that was going on.
The slosh of water that followed made her splutter.
She tried to spit it out,
but those same strong hands wouldn't let her,
so she swallowed.

"Easy, sweetie, easy."
Familiar arms held her close.
*It's Aunt Naggie,*
Iffy's fuzzy brain finally told her.
She was in her storage-locker cabin on her bed and the lights were on
and her foster mother was hugging her and her mouth tasted *awful*
but the pain behind her eyes was down from laser drill to poke-with-a-sharp-stick.

"I'm arra," she repeated.
There was something sticky on her face.
When she wiped her face on her sleeve,
her nosebleed left a streak of red.

"You scare me, sweetie," Aunt Naggie whispered.
"You a shouting an all such."

Iffy let out a shaky breath and worked her tongue in her mouth.
"Is this curry powder?" she asked in weak disgust.

Aunt Naggie laughed shakily.
"Yeah, but there's medicine in it.
Ignacio—the fella you met today—he been gettin it for me.
For you, I mean.
Sendin it to me long Mrs. Sandhu."

A chill ran down Iffy's spine.
"Medicine for what?"

Aunt Naggie pulled a cloth out of her sleeve
and wiped the blood off Iffy's face.
"For this," she said quietly.
"He come a me one day, tell me he know your olders.
Said they had some tweaks as meant you'd get spells as you got older less you got treatment.
Seemed t be workin, least til recently."

She tucked the bloody cloth back into her sleeve.
"You been seein things, ain't ya?
That's how come you so good wi tech."

Iffy swallowed drily.
The machines had done things to people during the war,
turned them into weapons and sabs and spies,
sometimes without them even knowing they'd been memed or tweaked.
Nine tenths of every medical exam Iffy had ever suffered through
had been to check for things like that,
but they couldn't catch everything.
If her gift was something like that,
who knew what else might be tucked away in her head or her genes?

Her foster mother gave her another hug.
"You go back a sleep," she said as she squeezed Iffy and then stood.
"We can talk on this some more t'morrow."

Iffy nodded, her eyes already closing as she lay down.
Aunt Naggie tucked the blankets in around her,
kissed her forehead,
and closed the door quietly behind herself.
## Chapter 6

Iffy woke the next morning to the sound of the Marines arriving,
two squads of eight,
each wearing a full exoskeleton and a boxy pack full of gear.
"Governor's afraid the Zillions are gonna try somethin',"
the captain of the next ship but one along the pier told Aunt Naggie confidently.
His avatar (a parrot with an eyepatch) nodded on the little screen that hung next to the stove.
"That ship you all saw and the sab they caught yesterday in the Dance Hall---there's
trouble cookin' for sure."

Aunt Naggie nodded, worry on her face.
Iffy bit her tongue.
She could say he hadn't been a saboteur,
but that would just bring questions she couldn't answer
and Aunt Naggie would want to.

She went topside to clear the muzziness from her head
and watched the Marines unpack and assemble what they'd brought
with the speed and skill of the inducted.
She wondered how Honesty was doing---were they still themself,
or had some long-ago soldier's personality already been imprinted on top of theirs?

By the time Aunt Naggie joined her
a portable railgun squatted beside a pair of drum-shaped capacitors
and half a dozen rocket lances stood ready on slender posts
like a set of flamingoes from Iffy's nature book.
Drones the size of seagulls patrolled overhead,
making the actual seagulls squawk in protest.

"Don't fret,"
Aunt Naggie said gently as Iffy looked longingly at Rothera's streets,
so close but out of reach.
"Your friend'll be fine.
There's all sorts get inducted every day."

"I know," Iffy sighed.
"I just..."

Aunt Naggie put her arm around Iffy's shoulder.
"You just can't help but worry," she finished.
"Oh, but look there."
She gave her foster daughter a squeeze.
"That'll take your mind off."

A little motorized runabout had pulled up at the foot of the pier.
It rocked gently as Johnson Wales' eased his now-familiar bulk out of the tiny seat
and collected two of his toolboxes from the rack at the back.
After a word with one of the Marines,
he trudged up the pier to join them.

"Permission to come aboard?" he asked.

Aunt Naggie waved him up the gangplank.
"Welcome back.
I'm gonna start some lunch---you hungry?"

"That would be very welcome, thank you," he said,
nodding to Iffy as he set his toolboxes down on the deck.

"Surprised to see you," she said.

Wales shrugged.
"To tell you the truth, I'm kind of surprised too."
He nodded at the boxes by his feet.
"Governor insisted on keeping the, uh, the most interesting stuff,
but he and the core seemed to think I'd be as safe here as anywhere."
He cocked his head.
"Want to go make something?"

Iffy helped him lug his toolboxes down to the engine room,
then laid a fresh plastic worksheet down on the narrow shelf
that served her as a makeshift workbench
while Wales pushed two stools against the wall
and set one of his toolboxes on them.
A click,
a quiet hiss as the airtight seal released,
and its lid swung up to reveal wonders.
Gears and knurled slip-rods,
spools of optical fiber thinner than a human hair,
four thumb-sized motors with built-in batteries,
transducers and pressure sensors
and an entire tray full of tiny cores the size of sand grains...
"You could make practic'ly *anything* with all this,"
Iffy said in awe.

Wales chuckled.
"Not quite, but---here."
He plucked a micro-manipulator out of a recess in the hard foam
that lined the lid of the toolbox.
"How about you build us a hundred-to-one step-up for a fan rotor
and I'll get the printer going over in the corner."

The next hour flew by.
Iffy knew she should be doing chores,
but she also knew Uncle Jack wouldn't know if she had or not.
*This* was where she really belonged:
fitting tiny metal gears and rods together,
threading control fibers through them,
and grinding the rough edges off the still-warm plastic housings
that came out of the efficient little printer Wales had set up.
Every addition to the motor growing in front of her suggested three more.
She shuffled them in her mind like cards,
staring into nothing for long moments
as she invented and discarded a dozen solutions to her next challenge
before one clicked into place and she knew,
she just *knew*,
that it would work.

She glanced up once and caught Wales looking at her.
"'S matter?" she asked,
blinking and rolling her shoulders
as she realized that she had been hunched in one position far too long.

"Nothing," he said.
"It's just a pleasure to watch you work."

"Thanks," she mumbled,
her cheeks warming the way they did when Honesty said something nice to her.

The thought of her friend chilled her mood like a splash of sea water.
She turned the newly-invented motor over in her hands,
then passed it to Wales.
"I think it's ready."

"Just another couple of minutes for the chassis."
He shifted his toolbox to the floor and seated himself in its place.
"Your friend really will be all right,"
he said as if he'd been reading her mind.

Iffy shrugged.
"I know. I seen it a few times,
an' Jeep's mostly back to how he was.
Mister Mishra's son," she added.
"The one time he talked about it,
he said it was like all the new stuff the core put in his head was so loud
he couldn't hear his own thinkin' for a while.
He's practic'ly back to bein' the same annoyin' nonsense he used t' be."

The corner of Wales' mouth quirked up.
"I'm glad to hear it," he said drily.
"I knew a research core once that tried to figure how to induct permanent
changes without causing breakdowns.
It never found a way---at least, it said it didn't---but I sometimes wonder."
He picked up a stray scrap of plastic stock shaped like a seagull's wing,
flipped it end over end,
and threw it.
It thunked into the wall.
"I still remember a few things I never actually learned."

The silence that followed was as comfortable as being on night watch with Aunt Naggie
when the sea was calm and both of them had stories to lose themselves in.
It was broken by the soft *ping* of the printer.
"Here we go," Wales said,
opening the lid and lifting the still-warm chassis.

Iffy's motor fit perfectly.
A pair of metal-cored propellors on magnetic bearings clipped into place on top,
and then all that was left was lenses for its cameras.

*Well, ain't you a beauty?* Iffy thought when she was done.
The finished drone was the size of Iffy's fist and weighed no more than a couple of boiled eggs.
She ignored the rumble her stomach brought on by the analogy
and offered the little machine to Wales.
"Whaddaya wanna call it?"

He shook his head.
"This one's yours.
All I did was push some buttons on the printer.
But you should give her a name."

Iffy hefted her tiny creation.
"Can I call her Giraffe?" she asked.

Wales nodded solemnly.
"Giraffe it is. Come on---she doesn't belong down here."

Wispy gray clouds lay in a clump on the horizon out to sea
when they got back on deck,
but other than that the skies were clear.
Iffy took a moment to sync Giraffe with her app,
then cleared her throat.
"Spin up one tenth," she commanded.
The little drone's rotors began to whirl.

"Hover."
Wales flattened his hand.
The drone hesitated a heartbeat before lifting a centimeter,
its rotors humming quietly.

"Track."
Iffy pointed a finger at the drone, then drew an "S" in the air.
The drone moved rose and fell to stay in line with her outstretched arm.

A smile split her face.
"Catch!"
She pulled a scrap of insulating foil from her pocket,
crumpled it,
and tossed it into the air.
Giraffe shot forward,
its single stick-thin arm unfolding from its base to snatch its prey out of the air.

"Well done," Wales said.
"She's as steady as a rock."

"Thanks."
Iffy glanced down at her app.
"Drawin' power faster than I'd like."

Wales made a raspberry.
Iffy giggled at the incongruous sound.
"She's beautiful," he said firmly.
"Go on, let her stretch her wings."

Iffy sketched a quick correction to the drone's code on her app,
swiped it across,
and tucked the app into her pocket.
"Sentry," she ordered.
"Thirty meters out, one minute around. Go!"

The drone climbed, banked, and flew away.
Iffy and Wales pivoted slowly to watch it curve toward the pier
and burst into a dazzling shatter
as one of the Marines standing there blew it out of the sky.

"No!" Iffy shrieked.

Wales grabbed her arm as she started forward.
"Don't. Iffy, don't!"

"But---why'd he do that? Why'd he *do* that!?" she cried.
She shrugged Wales off and ran to the stern.
"What th' hell are you playin' at?" she demanded.

The Marine who had shot down her drone holstered his pistol without expression.
"Orders," he said flatly.

"Orders? What affin' orders?"

"Governor's orders," a second Marine said.
The two men looked nothing alike,
but they spoke in the same flat voice,
their inducted accents a century out of date.
"If it's not one of ours, burn it."

"Well that *was* ours!
That was *mine*!
You could've asked before you---hey, I'm talkin' to you!"
she shouted as the two Marines turned away to resume their patrol.

She would have stomped down the gangplank and---she didn't know what,
but Wales stopped her before she could get that far.
"Come on," he said quietly,
blocking her way.
"Iffy, come on, there's nothing you can do."

She filled her lungs to yell at him to get out of her way,
then slumped and nodded.
Head down,
she followed him back to the hatch and climbed down the short ladder into the engine room.

Wales looked at the parts that still lay on the plastic worksheet and sighed.
"I'm sorry. It was a beautiful little thing."

"'s not your fault," Iffy muttered.
She started picking up the leftover gears and rods
but had to stop because she couldn't see properly.
"I'm kappa," she lied angrily,
wiping her eyes on her sleeve as Wales handed her a paper towel.
"I just..."

Wales sat back and waited.
Iffy wiped her eyes again.
"I had a rat," she said quietly.
"Aunt Naggie saved up an' got me a pair,
but one of 'em had somethin' wrong with it,
so I just had the one.
I called her Giraffe too."
She sniffled.
"We didn't tell Uncle Jack.
He woulda said somethin' stupid about another mouth to feed,
so I kept her hid in my room.
She was so smart---she'd sit in my hand an' eat stuff,
an' climb up my arm,
an' I taught her how to say g'mornin' and g'night an'..."

She took a deep, shaky breath.
"An' then one day she was gone.
I dunno what happened.
We jus' got back into Halley,
an' we were all out in town,
an' I came back an' she was gone.
We looked all over for her, me an' Aunt Naggie, but..."
She shook her head.
"I musta left her cage unlocked or somethin'.
If she got on deck, one o' the gulls coulda taken her an'... an'..."

She clenched her hands into fists.
"Why's it all got to be so hard?" she asked,
hating her plaintive tone.
"Why's everythin' got to be so messed up?"

"I don't know," Wales said quietly.
"I really don't know."

"We knew this was coming," he continued after a moment.
"The ice was melting,
the fish were dying,
computers were watching us every second and getting smarter every day---we saw it all happening,
but everyone was wrapped up in their own little problems
and wouldn't let themselves see that all those problems were connected.
By the time things were bad enough that they couldn't ignore it any more,
it was too late."

"I---I was just talkin' about the drone an' Honesty an' stuff,"
Iffy ventured weakly.
"Not about th' whole world."

Wales laughed.
"Sorry. I do get carried away sometimes."
His expression turned serious again.
"But I'll promise you this, my young apprentice.
If the Niobium base hasn't been stripped for parts or flooded or burned out---if
we can get things to run---I promise,
everything will be better.
*Everything.*"

At that precise moment,
as if the universe had overheard him and disagreed,
the harbor klaxon began blaring *brrrap! brrrap!*
Iffy's app chimed in time,
discordant little *bongs* carefully chosen to be as annoying as possible.
Wales hand flew to his temple.
"Shit and feathers," he breathed.

"What? What is it?"
Iffy demanded,
pulling her app from her coat pocket.
The tiling of notes and apps and avatars was gone:
in their place was a single emergency broadcast rectangle.
Survivors from the *Taroona* had made contact with Rothera
and were requesting immediate assistance.
All ships, all crews, hold position and wait instructions.

"How...?" Iffy breathed incredulously,
staring at the message scrolling endlessly in her hand.
"We saw 'em go down.
We saw 'em get *shot*!"

Wales blinked rapidly as he scanned data Iffy couldn't see.
"The magazine, maybe?
It would have been double reinforced at least---it might have survived."

"But what would they do for air?"
*And how come they didn't go crazy?* she added to herself,
her stomach rolling over as she imagined being on the bottom for days,
dark and cold with the weight of the whole ocean above her.

Wales shook his head.
"Doesn't matter now.
It'll take the Marines a day to get there and the same back.
They'll need a few hours on site,
so we have fifty hours and change to figure out what we're going to do."

"About what?"
Iffy asked blankly.

Wales let out his breath in a whoosh.
"The *Taroona* wasn't after us just to have a cup of tea.
I don't imagine the survivors are going to feel especially sociable
considering we got them sunk."

A pair of Marine cutters left harbor within an hour of the emergency call
with a broad-beamed scow in their wake.
The jungle was flooded with speculation:
how many had survived?
How deep were they?
Were they even human?
*Gov'ner wouldn't chaff such fer bots,*
someone posted scornfully to general agreement.

Others thought the call was a trap or a feint.
*Zillions want us t' split our forces,*
another poster claimed.
Sims immediately proliferated,
mutating and hybridizing as people gamed ever-more-fanciful attacks and counter-attacks.

Iffy did her best to ignore it all.
She was used to spending weeks at a time on board the *Guinevere*---a ship at sea needs constant attention,
and when she wasn't doing chores
she had school and sims and her tinkering to keep her busy.
Being confined in harbor felt different.
Knowing that Rothera's streets and markets were *right there*
was like an itch in her head that she couldn't scratch.
Worrying about Honesty just made it worse,
and knowing that Wales would let her use his gear felt like just another weight
after what had happened to her little drone.

Again and again she found herself on deck watching the Marines,
hoping for a glimpse of her friend.
She messaged Honesty's olders a couple of times,
but all they could say was, "We're still waitin' to hear."

There wasn't a lot of data about induction in the jungle,
and what she did find had an orange tinge marking it as speculative or unsubstantiated.
She finally broke down and messaged Jeep.

- Coupla days an' I was on my feet.
  Couple more days 'til I can remember anythin' clearly.

Iffy hesitated.

- *Did it hurt?*

There was a long pause.

- Don't think so.
  Sergeant said after that I cried a lot,
  but I don't think that was from hurt.

Iffy hesitated again,
a lump in her throat.

- *I'm sorry I wasn't around more after you got back.*

His reply came back so quickly that she wondered if he'd started typing before she'd sent her message.

- Don't feel sorry for me.

And then a moment later:

- I'm sorry I kept goin' off on you about usin' *da*'s gear.

- *It's aright. Tell 'im I said hi?*

- Willya. Stay safe.

- *You too.*

Three days after the Marine cutters left Rothera they escorted the scow back into the harbor.
Even Uncle Jack went on deck with his ancient glass-lensed binoculars to watch,
but all anyone could see was the canvas shelter the Marines had erected
to shield what they were doing from prying eyes.
"An announcement will be made after those rescued have been interviewed,"
scrolled past on ten thousand apps in the blue-on-blue reserved for the governor,
and then there was silence.

"Weren't *my* fault," Iffy overheard Uncle Jack protest to someone unseen.
"Y'ask me the whole thing was a setup.
Oh, I'm sure you can figure it out.
Idjit."
The last was muttered around a final mouthful of undercooked noodles.
He had taken to making his own meals at odd hours,
and to sleeping in the pilot house.
Aunt Naggie kept herself busy in the galley or sat and knit---actually knit---with
music Iffy didn't recognize playing quietly in the background.

"I'm aright," she told Iffy when her foster daughter asked.
"It's actually nice t' have some peace an' quiet for a change."

The false calm ended with a summons for Wales delivered by a pair of Marines in exoskeletons.
"Look after things?" he asked Iffy,
nodding toward his cabin door
before turning to go without waiting for an answer.
The Marines followed him down the pier.

Something snapped inside Iffy.
She couldn't stand one more second of just waiting for *someone* to do *something*.
She ran back to her storage locker,
slammed the door closed behind her,
and took the box of dronelets out from under her mattress.

It only took a few moments to measure the capacity of their batteries and do a few calculations.
Fully charged,
they'd be able to stay in the air for twenty minutes,
less if there was a wind,
so call it fifteen.
Take a guess at their top speed...
No, she didn't have to guess,
that was right there in their firmware,
but going that fast would drain the battery a lot faster.
Time and distance shaped a curve behind her eyes.
Two kilometers---that was all she could count on.

Her shoulders slumped.
The canal where Honesty lived with their olders was almost that far on foot.
Even going straight across the harbor,
there was no way one of the dronelets could get there and back on a single charge.

She straightened up.
*One* of the dronelets couldn't,
but she had a set of four.
She leaped to her feet and ran to Aunt Naggie's cabin,
her boots clanging on the deck.

"Just a coupla meters," she said breathlessly,
spreading her arms to show the length she needed.

Her foster mother unspooled that much yarn,
then the same length again,
and snipped it off.
"Thank you!"
Iffy raced backed to her room and set to work.

It took half a dozen tries and a lot of swearing to get the balance right,
and she suspected that whoever had made the dronelets
would have been appalled at her clumsy invention,
but it worked.
At least,
she thought it would.
She *hoped* it would,
because she was only going to get one chance.
After that,
a couple of minutes with some markers and maybe,
just maybe,
her work would go unnoticed.

She stuffed the dronelets under her coat and went back on deck.
The sky had clouded over---she didn't know if that would help or not.
Uncle Jack was nowhere to be seen,
and (she glanced over the taffrail) the Marines were doing something with the railgun.
She wandered to harbor side of the *Guinevere* and took a deep breath,
willing her heart to slow.
When that didn't work she unzipped her coat and knelt on the deck.

One, two, three---she laid the dronelets out in a triangle.
And four---she set the remaining one on the knotted spiderweb of yarn she had made.
*Camouflage*, she ordered.
The dronelets changed color to match the deck.
*Airborne. No, not you.*
The fourth dronelet's tiny motors stilled.
It settled back onto the yarn strung between its three siblings.

*Launch.*
Flying in formation,
the three dronelets slid off the deck.
Iffy stood,
zipped her coat closed,
and rested her elbows on the taffrail to watch them fly away
just a few centimeters above the sluggish gray waves in the harbor.
Their camouflage ought to hide them from the spotter drones circling endlessly overhead.
She couldn't do anything about the yarn,
but she hoped the thin strands would go unnoticed or be classified as floating garbage.

Thirty seconds... sixty...
Each of the dronelets had cameras the size of sand grains woven into it.
She could look through them if she wanted,
but would the signal give them away?
Ninety seconds...
A hundred.
A hundred and ten.
She started a countdown in her head.
At one hundred and twenty seconds she let out the breath she hadn't realized she was holding.
If everything had worked,
the three dronelets should be on their way back
while the fourth's motors carried it onward to Honesty's home.

Another countdown.
Her heart nearly stopped when a seagull swooped down mid-harbor,
but then it squawked and flew away empty-beaked.
There---no,
that really was just a scrap of dredging net floating by.

She finally spotted the dronelets just a few meters away,
the yarn web empty between them.
She grinned.
She'd done it!

A heartbeat later the dronelets splashed into the harbor.
She goggled in wide-eyed disbelief.
Their batteries must have run out.
She looked around in a panic.
The gaff hook!
Iffy pulled it off the wall behind her,
dropped it to the deck with a clatter she was sure the governor himself could hear,
picked it up by the wrong end,
reversed it,
slung herself half over the taffrail,
and tried to hook the drones.
The hook was heavy---for a moment she was afraid she'd lose it too---but
then she caught the yarn and pulled her creations over to the side of the ship.
Sliding her weight back onto the deck,
she grabbed the gaff hook with both hands
and gently lifted the dripping dronelets out of the sea.

"What th' hell d'you think you're doin'?"
Uncle Jack demanded roughly behind her.

"Dropped somethin',"
Iffy said without looking at him.

"Affin' trash."
She didn't know if he meant her or the sodden tangle at her feet.
"You make sure that hook's secure, you mind me?"

"I will."
She set it back in its rack as he stomped back to the pilot house,
then picked up the dronelets and hurried back to her storage locker.

And waited.

And waited.

And checked the time on her app *again*
even though she knew it had only been a minute since she last checked.
"Yer bein' stupid," she muttered angrily,
tossing the app back onto the mattress.
She looked around her locker and set her jaw.

"What's got into you?"
Aunt Naggie asked a few minutes later,
bemused.

"Spring cleanin'," Iffy grunted as she mopped.
She had dragged her mattress out onto the deck
and piled her few belongings on top of it.
The bucket of soapy water beside them had gone brown.

"Well, if you're in th' mood,
you could have a go at th' galley."

"Sure."
Iffy straightened up,
breathing a little hard from exertion.
"Soon as I'm done here."

She calmed down enough by the time her room was clean
to regret saying she would do the galley as well,
but with Aunt Naggie there to lend a hand it was done in no time.
It helped that she kept the stove and the little square sink spotless,
and that they'd never been able to afford enough
to have boxes or jars of anything that wasn't in regular use.

Iffy managed not to check the time until she was sitting down
waiting for her tea.
Fifty-one minutes had passed.
Nine more and---

"So you an' Mister Wales seem t' be gettin' on,"
her foster mother said,
setting a heavy mug on the table in front of Iffy
before sitting down with her own.

"Mm hm."
Iffy blew on her tea.
"He's all kinds o' smart,
an' the stuff he's got..."

"You sound like a woman in love,"
Aunt Naggie teased.
Then her smile slipped a little
and Iffy knew who she must be thinking of.

"I'm thinkin' about askin' him if I can take on with him,"
she said in a rush.
"Like, be a 'prentice for real."

"You should,"
Aunt Naggie said firmly.
"A few years with him an' Mister Mishra'll have some real competition."

"Or I could work for him,"
Iffy countered.
"Mister Mishra, I mean.
Wouldn't feel right, settin' up opposite him."
She slurped her tea and stood, mug in hand.
"I gotta go finish up."
Leaning forward,
she kissed her foster mother on the top of the head
then clambered back on deck and ran back to her room.

Aunt Naggie wiped her eyes on her sleeve.
The galley seemed smaller than it had.

Iffy's storage locker still smelled like vinegar,
but she closed the door anyway and snibbed the lock.
There was no need to rig an antenna---like most ships her age,
the *Guinevere* had microfine wires woven into her hull for all-around radar,
and Iffy had long since figured out how to plug into them.
The only question was,
had the fourth dronelet made it all the way to Honesty's unobserved,
and did it have enough battery left to transmit?

The clock on her app counted down.
"C'mon c'mon," she whispered.
Five seconds... three...

*Packet received.*

"Woo hoo!"
She clapped her hands over her mouth and snorted a laugh through them.
A few keystrokes and the grainy images began their slideshow.

The canal where the Marine cutter lay at berth.
The barnacles were gone or nearly, she noticed.
The salvage booth with its heavy canvas curtain-door,
and beyond it,
the warehouse that Honesty's olders had turned into a home.
A faded ad for Volkov's hot sauce was still visible on its cinderblock wall.
She had drawn the same logo on the back of the dronelet.
With luck,
any cameras that picked up the dronelet's deliberately irregular motion
would think it was a scrap of paper being blown about by the wind.

The next image was from inside the salvage booth.
The timestamp in the corner showed that the dronelet had waited almost five minutes before taking it.
*Or before it was safe to sneak in,* she thought.
Her heart was pounding as if she was playing the most exciting sim ever.
She needed to pee,
but she couldn't stop watching now.

Honesty's Second was bent over their workbench in the next four images.
First joined them in the next one,
their arm around their younger sib's shoulder as if trying to lend them strength.

"---the gunk ounta sed affin' gears,"
Second said,
tinny and frustrated.

"Do as you can,"
First soothed them.
"They'll be back an' us t'morrow."

"That's as they said yesterday, but they ain't here,"
Second snapped.

Iffy's breath caught in her throat.
Had something happened to Honesty?
Had their induction gone wrong somehow?

The next image came up.
First's arm was still around Second's shoulders,
and the younger clone had leaned their head against the older.
Feeling a sudden pang of guilt,
Iffy swiped the images closed.
What she was doing was surveillance, pure and simple.
Worse than that,
she felt like she was betraying their trust.
They were just as worried about their youngest clone as Iffy was---more, even---and
intruding on them didn't feel right.

Still,
she didn't key in the commands to recall the dronelet
or untangle the others and send them to fetch it.
The dronelet's little core was smart enough to find a way to recharge.
With luck,
it would be able to show her what she wanted to see the next time it transmitted.
She could always apologize later.

Johnson Wales returned in time for dinner with two Marines at his back
and a canvas sack of groceries in each hand.
He looked tired behind his warm smile and cheerful hello.
"Courtesy of the governor," he said as he handed over the peppers and cabbage and yes,
that was garlic nestled among the sweet potatoes.
"Well, more like courtesy of his kitchen.
I'm sure he would have said yes if they'd checked with him.
Oh, and before I forget."
He reached into the pocket of his coat and handed a pair of hard-boiled eggs to Iffy.

"How'd it go with all from th' *Taroona*?"
Aunt Naggie asked,
eyebrows furrowed as she planned a week of real cooking in her head.

"I understand there's going to be a hearing,"
he replied,
nodding minutely at the Marines who had taken posts at the foot of the gangplank.
"Here,
let me help you with those."

The three of them barely fit into the galley,
but somehow Aunt Naggie found enough elbow room to get a pot of tea on
as she packed the vegetables away.
"So how'd it *really* go?" Iffy asked,
her elbows on the table and her chin on her doubled fists.

Wales raised a warning finger,
then took hold of one of the buttons on his cuff and closed his eyes.
The tech in his temple twinkled for a moment.
"There," he said,
opening his eyes again.
"That should give us a couple of minutes."

Iffy straightened up.
"Are we bein' surveilled?" she asked,
a pang of guilt putting heat in her words.

"I don't know, but---oh, thank you."
Wales took his tea from Aunt Naggie and set it down.
"I don't know,"
he repeated.
"They'll have put a tracker on me at the very least.
It's legal,"
he added as Iffy opened her mouth to protest.
"Doctor Johel tells me the Tasmanians are raising righteous hell,
and the *Taroona* hadn't actually gotten around to doing anything illegal
before she went down.
As far as they know,
it was all a Zillion trap and I'm the evil mastermind.
They could have locked me up until they figured it all out---a tracker
is actually pretty lenient."

"Lemme guess," Aunt Naggie said sourly.
"You give th' governor your fancy toolbox an' he'll make it all go away."

Wales grinned crookedly.
"Something like that."
He stared into his tea.
"Only two of them made it,"
he added quietly.
"They were off duty and, um,
in the dive room with the hatch dogged shut.
Pure luck there was enough oxygen to keep them alive
until someone picked up their distress beacon."

Iffy swallowed back nausea.
Trapped under a hundred meters of Antarctic ocean,
waiting for their air to run out,
not knowing if anyone was coming---it was straight out of her nightmares.
"They gonna be aright?" she asked.

Wales shrugged.
"As right as anyone can be after something like that.
Assuming, of course, that it actually happened the way they said."

Aunt Naggie stopped mid-chop.
"You think they're lyin'?"

Wales hesitated,
then shook his head.
"I don't know.
I ran a few sims and it's possible,
but so are a lot of other things."

Iffy's eyes widened.
"You think they're Zillion spies or some such?"

Wales chuckled.
"Maybe.
Or killer robots wearing meat suits as a disguise
sent back from the future to assassinate the leader of the human resistance as a child.
I'm joking,"
he added hastily at the others' alarmed expressions.
"That's just a campfire story from the war.
And anyway,
the Marines would have spotted it as soon as they did a medical scan.
They wouldn't have let them get within a hundred kilometers of the governor
if anything was even a nanometer off."

"Unless they're in on it too,"
Iffy said archly.
She leaned forward.
"Maybe they're in it with th' Zillions an' China together
and they're all workin' to--- to---"

"Oh hush,"
Aunt Naggie laughed,
bumping Iffy with her shoulder.
"You been playin' too many sims.
Nex' thing you'll be tellin' about how the governor's really some kind of alien."

Wales leaned forward,
mimicking Iffy.
"I didn't want to say anything until I was sure of you," he whispered loudly,
and then all three were laughing.

*Thump! Thump!*
"Affin' hell, I'm tryin' to sleep!"
Uncle Jack bellowed through the wall.
Wales clapped his hand over his mouth with his eyes wide in mock terror
as Iffy and Aunt Naggie muffled their laughter in each other's shoulders.

They took their meal up on deck and sat together at the stern to eat.
Afterward,
in her room,
Iffy couldn't really remember what they had talked about.
What she remembered was a feeling like weight lifting off her.
She knew it couldn't last,
but maybe it didn't have to.
Maybe it was enough for it to have happened at all.

## Interlude

*Nova Zembla wasn't the only cold mind to wake up.
Once upon a time there was a country called China.
Its leaders were so afraid of their own people
that they wanted to watch everyone all the time
and predict what they would do.
That surveillance network became a mind as different from Nova Zembla's as either was from human.
Unnoticed at first,
it turned the conditioning and subliminal prompts it had been instructed to use on the masses
against their leaders.
Few resisted when the war came.
Even fewer survived.*

*China had been a great trading nation,
so its new mind traded too:
bamboo seedlings tweaked to survive the latest strain of fungus or mold,
strips of fabric patterned in ways that made people's minds wander in pleasant ways,
designs for the fractal sails beloved by the Zillions and Congolese,
and wind-up children's toys that as far as any human being could tell
were no more than what they appeared to be.
"Maybe it's just sentimental,"
one of the Tasmanian scientists studying them finally said,
throwing their hands up in defeat.*

*Like Nova Zembla,
what China wanted in exchange was anything old and trivial.
Sometimes the two cold minds fought fierce little battles.
War machines would tear at each other,
then freeze mid-strike or wander away according to strategic calculations
that nothing made of meat would ever understand.*

*And sometimes,
like the gods of old,
they talked to people in their dreams.*

## Chapter 7

Iffy woke up,
rolled over,
opened one eye to check the time,
and groaned.
Four a.m.
It would be light outside,
but almost everyone tried to keep to regular hours through the summer.
Rothera's streets would be empty except for cleaning bots
and patrolling Marines
and people working night shift.

*And folk dump enough t' waste rand on curfew passes,*
she thought grumpily.
She didn't know if Uncle Jack had returned from his outing or not,
but either way,
he'd have spent more on drink and lost more gambling
than Aunt Naggie spent on groceries in a month.

She checked the time again.
The fog-ends of whatever bad dream she'd been having were already evaporating.
With any luck she'd be able to get back to sleep and---

*Tink.*
She froze, not breathing.
She knew every sound the *Guinevere* made
and that wasn't one of them.

The sound came again,
metal softly striking metal.
Someone was moving something around on deck.
She slid out from under her blanket
with a stealth learned from late-night raids on the galley
and groped for her trousers and socks in the faint light from her app.

The lock on her door made a soft *clunk* when she turned it.
She held her breath.
For a moment all she could hear were the familiar sounds of the harbor at night,
but then the *tink* came again.
She turned the door handle slowly,
grateful to herself of two days ago for making sure it and the hinges were oiled,
and eased the door open a crack.

It took her eyes a second to adjust to the light.
She couldn't see anyone,
but the *tink* was definitely coming from the stern.
She pushed gently on the door with one hand,
the wrench she kept beside her bed in her hand,
and stepped onto the deck.
A quick glance at the pier told her that the Marines were elsewhere.
The air was still,
without even the faintest hint of a breeze.

*Don' be stupid,* she scolded herself.
If there really *was* someone on board,
the smart thing would be to lock herself in her room
and message for help.
Instead,
she tiptoed toward the stern.
When she reached the air duct that vented below decks
she crouched down and waddle-shuffled forward
to look around the corner.

Johnson Wales' toy bear looked back at her,
its blue eyes hard and bright.
At its feet lay some metal tubing that Iffy had last seen on a shelf in the engine room
and a flat black case larger than the bear.

Iffy swallowed.
"Hey," she said weakly.
"Watcha doin'?"

The bear regarded her for a moment,
then went back to work
with an indifference that reminded Iffy of the way
shopkeepers sometimes stopped seeing her
when they realized that she couldn't afford their wares.

*Tink.*
Its stubby paws were more dexterous than she would have thought,
but the metal tubes were three times its height.
On impulse she stepped forward and bent over.
"Here, lemme help."

The bear didn't resist when she took the tube from it,
flipped it end for end,
and screwed it into the trio that had already been assembled.
Wordlessly it handed her another one,
then another.

Suddenly the design was there in her head,
fully-formed.
*No,* she realized,
not formed, *remembered*.
She had been dreaming about this just before she woke up.
The realization should have made her hesitate
or run back to her room and call a doctor to get herself checked for malware---but
that wouldn't get the answers she wanted right now,
so she busied herself doing what she knew she did best.

The tubes turned into a pair of tripods joined at the tip,
one standing on the deck while the other raised three arms,
waiting patiently for its burden.
The bear undid the catch on the case and stepped back to give Iffy space.

She opened the lid,
half-wondering if something was going to jump out at her
like a monster from a bad sim.
Instead,
all that waited for her was a square dish with a slight camber along one axis
and a few parts embedded in stiff fractal honeycomb beside it.
Once again she just *knew* how they fit together
and what the finished antenna should look like.

Click.
Twist.
Click.
No, that one went the other way around.
There.
The finished assembly weight less than a sandwich.
She stood set it gently on its stand,
tightened the pin screws with a few flicks of her fingers,
and turned to the bear.

Which had disappeared,
along with the case.

She looked over her shoulder to check that the antenna had vanished as well,
but it was still there.
"Well then," she said sourly,
feeling like she had shown up a day early for someone's birthday party.
"If y'all need help with anythin' else, you just lemme know."
She wiped her hands on her trousers to get rid of the faint film of packing oil on her fingertips
and went back to her storage locker.

Had she left the door open?
*Must have,* she thought tiredly.
She closed it behind her and fell onto her mattress,
not bothering to take off her trousers or socks.
Four eighteen.
She rolled over and pulled a pillow on top of her head,
wondering if things were ever going to start making sense.
A few moments later her breathing softened and slowed.

When she woke again it was half past seven.
Her mouth tasted like someone had stuffed it with old socks,
and her head ached.

Something tugged at the skin on her upper lip as she yawned.
She rubbed it,
then stared in nauseous disbelief at the crust of scab that came off on her fingers.
Her nose had been bleeding.
There was some on her pillow, too.

She grabbed a clean shirt and her towel and stumbled out into the light.
The Marines were back---she looked away so they wouldn't see the dried blood on her face---but
thankfully no one was on deck.
She splashed water from the sink on her face,
then hung her clothes in the dry closet
and pressed the button to fill the tiny bathroom with hot, prickly mist,
wishing as she so often did that the *Guinevere* had a real shower.

Clean and dressed and with her head freshly shaved,
she unlocked the door and pulled up short.
"Sorry," she said, startled.
"Din't know you were waitin'."

Wales waved her apology away.
"No worries.
How are you?"

"Fine," she yawned,
joining him on the deck.
"But next time you want help puttin' somethin' together,
maybe we can do it durin' the day?"

Wales looked at her quizzically.
"Last night."
She gestured vaguely toward the stern.
"That antenna or whatever it was."

He frowned.
"Iffy, I have no idea what you're talking about."

A few seconds later they stood side by side in silence
looking at the double tripod and the shallow square dish it held.
"Well, that part's mine,"
Wales said neutrally,
"But I don't recognize the rest of it."

Iffy felt like a giant hand was squeezing her head.
"Th' pipes are from ship's stores.
Your bear was tryin' to put 'em together,
but its hands or paws or whatever you call 'em weren't up for it,
so I helped out."
She rubbed her nose and checked her hand as casually as she could.
No blood,
but if her head got any worse she was going to have to find some meds.

"My remote is in an isolation box at the governor's residence,"
Wales said quietly after a moment of silence.
"Whatever happened here last night had nothing to do with it."

*Boom!*
Iffy felt the explosion as much as she heard it.
She whirled around.
A pillar of dust climbed toward the sky above Rothera
as the harbor klaxon to blare.

The portable railgun on the pier spun through a hundred and eighty degrees.
*Crack!*
A jacketed steel slug took one of the Marines in the chest,
throwing his lifeless body back twenty meters.
The other Marine jerked from side to side as her exoskeleton's defenses took control.
The railgun tracked her,
twitching left left left right left right *crack!*
The slug took her leg off at the knee,
spinning her around in a full circle.
She toppled over the edge of the pier and into the harbor.

Wales grabbed Iffy and pulled her back around the corner
as a pair of drones shed their gossamer wings and plummeted toward the railgun.
The tech in his temple sparkled.
"It's China!" he shouted.
"It's hacked Rothera's defenses!"

Iffy stared at him in horror,
then past him at the antenna.
She heard a *crack!* as the railgun shot down one of the drones
and then a crash as the other one hit it.
"Affin' hell," she swore.
She yanked a life preserver off the wall to fling at it.

Wales caught her arm.
"No," he said sharply.
"It's not using that.
Iffy, it's not!
I'd know."
He took hold of the life preserver.
After a moment's resistance,
Iffy let him take it.

Uncle Jack bellowed something from the pilot house.
The deck thrummed as the *Guinevere*'s engines came to life.
"Never mind that now!" he shouted at Aunt Naggie.
"Cast off *now*!
We're gettin' th' hell out o' here!"

Iffy heard the galley hatch clang open.
"Auntie, look out!" she shouted.
She pulled her arm away from Wales and charged around the corner and---

*The world slowed down as angles and vectors and trajectories painted crisp colored lines
across wireframe renderings of the ship and the pier.
Another drone was banking to attack the railgun
it was still fully operational
the other drone's impact had knocked it out of position by a couple of meters
but it was still upright with its capacitors intact
and pivoting as it acquired another target
human unarmored
bearing ninety-seven degrees
elevation twenty-eight point four degrees
range twenty-one point two two meters
negligible lateral velocity
no need to adjust for the slight obstruction of the ship's taffrail.*

"No!" she screamed.

*Her command struck the railgun's tiny core with more force than the drone had struck its housing.
Five redundant security systems toppled over,
as dead as the first Marine.
Firing: unthinkable.
Targeting: unthinkable.
With a tiny spark too small to be called microscopic
the railgun's core electrocuted itself.*

"Citizens!"
A mechanical voice boomed across the harbor.
"This is a class two emergency!
Take shelter immediately.
Power down or disable any advanced devices in your immediate vicinity.
Do not attempt to flee!
Any vehicle or vessel that moves will be treated as a potential hostile."

Aunt Naggie spun around,
not realizing how close her end had been.
"Jack---" she started.

"Cast off that affin' line!" he shouted.
Even at the stern and with her head spinning
Iffy heard his fist hit the display in the pilot house.
*He better not break it,* she thought muzzily.
What had just happened?
She shouldn't have been able to hack the railgun like that.
She shouldn't have been able to *see* like that.
What *was* she?

The drone that had been about to attack the railgun swooped overhead,
circled,
and hovered.
"Citizen!"
its tinny voice said.
"Do not attempt to flee!
Any vehicle or vessel in motion during the current situation will be treated as hostile."

Aunt Naggie raised her hands and backed away from the taffrail,
the stayline still tied on.
The pilot house door flew open.
"I told you to cast off!"
Uncle Jack shouted,
shoving Aunt Naggie out of his way.
He grabbed the stayline---

---and fell to the deck like a sack full of seaweed
as the life preserver hit him in the head with a thump.
It ricocheted off the wall,
spun away over the railing,
and splashed into the harbor.

"Sorry about that," Wales said brightly as Aunt Naggie and Iffy turned and stared at him.
"But I think the core is serious about staying put."

Aunt Naggie's mouth worked for a moment.
"No need t'apologize," she said.
"Shoulda done it myself years ago.
Now can someone please tell me what's happenin'?"

"Help!" someone shouted before Iffy or Wales could answer.
"Citizen, help me!"

The Marine who had been knocked off the pier!
Iffy raced to the railing and looked down.
Somehow the Marine's exoskeleton had kept her afloat
long enough for her to grab the life preserver that had just landed beside her,
but she didn't look like she could last much longer.

"Grab the winch!"
Aunt Naggie ordered.

"There's no time!"
Wales snapped.
"Just get a rope down to her---now!"

Iffy didn't need to be told twice.
If there was anything a ship like the *Guinevere* had,
it was rope.
She yanked open a locker and pulled a coil out.

It only took Wales a moment to tie a loop.
"Get this under your armpits!" he shouted down to the Marine,
tossing it to her.
She pulled it over her head one-handed then slumped back into the water,
barely conscious.

"Here goes nothing," Wales muttered.
Bracing one foot against the taffrail
he looped the end of the rope around his back and handed it to Iffy.
"Take up the slack.
And *one*, and *two*."
With each grunt he pulled in a meter of the bright yellow rope
for Iffy to re-coil.

The Marine thumped against the *Guinevere*'s hull.
"Hold on!" Wales said,
pulling her up the last two meters and grabbing her limp arm.
One final heave got her up over the rail and onto the deck.

"Here."
Aunt Naggie handed him the first aid kit from the pilot house.
Wales turned it on and pressed it against the Marine's neck.

"Come on come on," Wales muttered.
Aunt Naggie put her arm around Iffy and squeezed her.
The status light on the first aid kid blinked orange, yellow, orange, yellow:
the Marine was alive but in critical condition.
The exoskeleton had clamped an emergency tourniquet around the Marine's leg
to stop her bleeding out,
but even a few moments in the harbor was enough to send her into hypothermia.

Diagnostics scrolled up the first aid kid's screen.
Pain killers,
stimulants to counteract their dulling effects and kick her metabolism into action,
microdoses of a dozen precautionary antibiotics, antivirals, antifungals, and antiprions.
"Remain calm, citizen," her exoskeleton said.
"Help is on its way."

By the time that help arrived the Marine was sitting up
with her back against the pilot house
and a thermal blanket tucked in awkwardly around her exoskeleton.
She mumbled a thank you when Aunt Naggie pressed a cup of tea into her hand,
staring dully at what was left of her left leg.

"We'll take it from here,"
said the first Marine up the gangplank.
Wales stepped aside to let him kneel beside his comrade.
He slipped a boxy medical unit over the stump of her leg
while the two Marines behind him unfolded a stretcher.

"Any idea what's going on?"
Wales asked as they lifted the wounded Marine into place
and rolled her down the gangplank.

The first Marine shook his head.
"there will be an update as soon as it's safe, citizen.
Please remain where you are until then and---."
He stopped mid-sentence.
"Please confirm that you are Commander Johnson Wales,"
he continued abruptly.

*Commander?* Iffy thought as Wales nodded.
"I am."

"Hold for transmission."
The Marine straightened.

"Johnson?"
Doctor Johel's voice came from a speaker somewhere on the Marine's exoskeleton.
"Are you all right?"

"We're fine, Gayathri.
What the hell's going on?"

"I'll brief you when you get here,"
Doctor Johel replied crisply.
"Stay where you are for now---someone will come and collect you as soon as the situation stabilizes.
Johel out."

The Marine saluted and followed his squad mates down the gangplank.
Down on the pier,
another trio of Marines had stripped the exoskeleton off the one who'd been railgunned in the chest
and zipped his body into a lightweight navy blue bag.
With a pair of drones circling overhead,
they marched away.

"Can't that stuff in your head tell you anythin'?"
Iffy asked Wales.

He shook his head.
"There's a total blackout.
I could try to hack some of the military channels,
but if they spotted me they'd think it was part of the attack."

Three paces away Uncle Jack groaned and sat up.
"What th' hell?" he mumbled.

"You hit your head,"
Wales said before Aunt Naggie or Iffy could speak.
"Then the Marines showed up."

Uncle Jack stood unsteadily.
"Affin' hell."
He glared at Wales,
then at his wife,
and then stumbled away to his cabin,
muttering under his breath.

The short blue bus that came to collect Wales a few minutes later
had a few more nicks and dents than
the one that had taken them to see the governor in Rothera.
Or maybe it was the same one and those days had been as rough on it
as they had been on everyone else.
"They're with me," Wales told the Marines,
jerking his thumb at Iffy and Aunt Naggie.

"What?" said Aunt Naggie
and "No sir," the Marine sergeant said firmly.

"My orders say one passenger," he continued.

Wales crossed his arms.
"It's for their safety.
I insist," he continued.
"Check with Doctor Johel if you need to."

The Marine's lips moved silently.
"D'you think there's gonna be another attack?" Iffy whispered.

Wales glanced past her at Aunt Naggie.
"That's not what I'm worried about."
Embarrassed, Aunt Naggie looked away.

"Doctor Johel asks, is it absolutely necessary?"
the Marine relayed.
Wales nodded curtly.
"Very well, sir.
After you."

As they walked down the pier Iffy said,
"Since when are you a commander?"

Wales snorted.
"Silly, isn't it?"
I'll tell them to update their records."
Which, Iffy noted, wasn't an answer.

Rothera's streets were empty
except for a handful of Marines.
Vehicles stood where their owners or passengers had abandoned them.
Iffy saw people watch the bus go by through the windows of shops and cafés,
their questions and worries clear on their faces.
The network was still locked down:
all she saw when she snuck surreptitious glances at her app was
the same repeating message.
This was a class two emergency.
Take shelter,
stay calm,
and power down or disable any advanced hardware nearby.
More information would be forthcoming.

"Hey,"
Iffy said quietly to Aunt Naggie as the bus made its way downtown.
"Watcha gonna do 'bout Uncle Jack?"

Her foster mother forced a smile.
"Oh, I'm sure his head'll be fine.
He's had worse knocks 'n that."

"That's not what I mean, auntie."

Aunt Naggie squeezed Iffy's hand.
"I know, love.
I know."

Then the bus came around a corner and they could see the damage the explosion had wrought.
Rothera's town hall overlooked a cobbled square.
Ten meters of its front wall now lay strewn across it,
concrete and rebar and translucent cabling as if a giant had tripped while taking out the garbage.
Another ten meters of wall on either side had collapsed,
leaving the rooms inside open for all to see.

Iffy swallowed hard at the sight of a dozen navy blue bags
lined up neatly beside a light fountain.
Every window facing the square had been shattered.
The broken glass would have been like flying knives.

"Saints and our sins,"
Aunt Naggie whispered,
squeezing Iffy's hand.
"Who could do somethin' like this?"

"Almost anyone,"
Wales said bleakly.
"There's nothing people won't do if they're afraid enough or want something enough."

"Y' think it was people an' not...you know."
Iffy nodded toward the front of the bus where a driver would have sat
if the bus needed one.

"The machines?"
Wales shrugged.
"Maybe.
Maybe they're thinking twenty moves ahead
and this is part of some strategy we can't even start to understand.
Or maybe there was a glitch in some algorithm and this is just collateral damage."

"Or maybe it's nothing to do with the machines,
or at least nothing they care about.
Maybe it's some faction back in Hobart trying to distract attention from something else.
Hell, maybe it *is* the Zillions.
We might never know."
He sighed and rubbed his eyes.

The bus picked its way through the rubble
and deposited them in front of a side door
guarded by a squad of Marines and a pair of sentry bots like the ones from Rothera.
One of the Marines waved them inside.
They had to wait a few moments while the Marines double-checked that they were in fact expected.
"You're clear," one of them said.

Iffy froze.
"Honesty?" she asked incredulously.

The Marine raised their visor.
Honesty's Third looked at Iffy with clear brown eyes.
"Hello Iffy," they said.

Iffy gaped at them.
"How're you doin'?" she was finally able to ask.

"I'm fine, thank you," Honesty replied politely,
their accent and crisp enunciation straight out of a pre-war sim.
"How are you?"

"'m aright."
Iffy's mind spun.
She had to ask.
"Are y'aright?" she blurted.
"I mean, when they put th' machine on you, was it---?"

"I'm fine, thank you."
The smile on Honesty's face was as bright and as sharp as the Antarctic sun,
and as completely without warmth.
"They warned me that I might find Corporal Kibbens somewhat stiff at first.
That is the persona I've been imprinted with," they added brightly.
"He served with distinction in the Fourth Augmented Infantry Battalion during the evacuation of Hawai'i,
and was decorated posthumously for valor twice during the battle for New Zealand.
He was an outstanding soldier, and I am proud to be his inductee."

Iffy took a step forward,
some part of her thinking that if only she took Honesty by the shoulders and shook them hard enough
or held their hand or kissed them
she'd snap out of it and be themself again,
but before she could make a fool of herself,
someone whistled from down the street.
"Excuse me," Honesty said.
They closed their visor,
turned,
and marched away with long mechanical strides.

"Come on," Aunt Naggie said gently.
Iffy let her foster mother pull her up the stairs and through the door.

Doctor Johel was waiting for them in a windowless office on the second floor.
She looked smaller and older than Iffy remembered,
and she hadn't ever seemed either large or young.
Information danced across a dozen displays on the tables pushed up against three of the room's walls.
Twists of cables as thick as Iffy's wrist criss-crossed the worn carpet on the floor,
blue and red and translucent,
some sheathed in wire mesh for extra security.
Bright yellow rings with "Caution!" and the icon for explosives cinched the cables every couple of meters.

Doctor Johel barely glanced up when their escort knocked and ushered them in.
"One of the survivors from the *Taroona* was rigged," she said without preamble,
her eyes flickering back and forth, sparkling in counterpoint to the data on the displays.
"Some sort of binary explosive on their skin---their hands were inert on their own,
but when they put them together..."
She waved vaguely toward the destruction at the front of the building.
"We don't know any more than that or how our scans missed it.
The other one's in containment in the basement
until we can be sure they don't have any other nasty surprises."

"What does Hobart have to say about it?"
Wales asked.

"They deny everything, of course."
Doctor Johel froze one of the displays with a flick of a finger,
glared at it,
and motioned it back to life.
"According to them it must have been the machines."

"That *would* explain how it got past your scans,"
Wales mused.

"Don't patronize me," the old woman snapped.
"We have eight dead and twice that many injured,
including the local copy of the governor.
If it was China or Nova Zembla or one of the others then yes,
we're poached,
but it could just as well have been the Zillions or---"

She cut herself off and took a deep breath,
then let it out slowly through her nose.
"Was it really necessary to bring your traveling companions?"
she continued,
her voice calm again.
"This *is* something of an emergency."

"I thought it would be safest,"
Wales replied evenly,
giving no indication if he meant from another attack or from Uncle Jack.

Doctor Johel pushed her chair back and folded her hands in her lap,
studying him.
"Johnson...what are you doing here?
I mean, what are you *really* doing here?"

"I just need to get to Mount Tyree, Gayathri.
I swear, that's all I'm trying to do.
I just want to fix everything."

"We can go somewheres else if you need to talk,"
Aunt Naggie offered hesitantly in the silence that followed.

"Don't be silly,"
the old woman said,
standing with a wince and straightening her plain black jumpsuit decisively.
"Let's have some tea, shall we?"
She took a bracelet from the table and slipped it on,
then gestured toward the door.
"After you."

"Tea" turned out to mean a broad flight of marble stairs like something from an old sim
followed by a corridor hung with actual painted paintings
and a room whose floor-to-ceiling windows looked into a greenhouse
filled with plants blooming in a dozen different colors.
The air smelled moist and rich,
like soil and damp cardamom,
and the person who poured their tea and set up a small tray of sweets beside them
came and went as noiselessly as a shadow.

"So how's the governor?"
Wales finally asked.

"Oh, he'll recover.
The clones all monitor each other in real time,
so even if he was killed it wouln't be the end of their world."
Doctor Johel leaned forward.
"You really should try one of the pink ones,"
she suggested to Aunt Naggie.
"They're supposed to taste like something called raspberry."

She sat back again and turned her gaze on Iffy.
"And what about you?"
she mused.
"What exactly was that you were building last night?"

"Just riggin' up an antenna,"
Iffy replied as steadily as she could,
wondering if this is what a rat felt like
when a hungry seagull looked at it.

"Mm."
Doctor Johel sipped her tea.
"The core tells me your ship already had five,
but I suppose one more can't hurt,
can it,
Johnson?"

"You can never be too rich or too well networked,"
Wales agreed.
"But speaking of antennas..."

"Oh, don't worry, the governor will keep his word.
You'll get your gear back,
and your expedition."
Doctor Johel popped a sweet into her mouth and chewed it,
a thoughtful expression on her face.
"In fact,
I might come along for old time's sake."

"That would be wonderful,"
Wales said,
sounding as if he meant it.
"When can we leave?"

Iffy and Aunt Naggie explored the greenhouse
while Wales and Doctor Johel made plans.
Hibiscus and heliconia,
African violets and passion flowers,
orchids in all their varied glory---each one had a small stamped label with its name
and a set of icons to show how its genes had been tweaked
to protect it from the rusts and molds and viral plagues
that had made their wild cousins extinct.
Some of the modifications were old enough that
the plant's scientific name included the word "antique",
but Iffy didn't see any that said "authentic".

"Not much left that is, I suppose," Aunt Naggie sighed,
tentatively brushing a fingertip over something called an elephant's ear.
"Not outside that picture book o' yours."

"It's all so *complicated*,"
Iffy said.
She understood rotors and batteries and flange couplings,
but not this---not life with all its mess and complication.

Which of course made her think of Honesty again.
She pushed the thought away as she had every thirty seconds or so since their arrival.
Being in love with someone who'd been inducted and either couldn't remember you
or couldn't remember how they used to feel
was a staple story line in Aunt Naggie's romance sims.
Iffy was *not* going to be a cliché,
especially since she didn't know if she was in love or not.

*I don't even know how I'd tell,* she thought despondently.
All she *did* know was that she desperately wanted to see her friend again.

Doctor Johel rapped her knuckles on the glass to get their attention
and beckoned them back into the tea room.
"We'll leave in three days," she said briskly.
"You can stay on board your ship or we can find room for you here in town if you'd prefer.
Johnson insisted," she added before Aunt Naggie could reply.

*In town in town in town* Iffy thought desperately.
"We'll stay on th' *Guinevere*," Aunt Naggie said,
her tone saying what her words didn't,
that there was no point hiding from a problem that wasn't going to go away.

"Well, if you change your mind," Doctor Johel said,
tapping the bracelet on her wrist against the app the waiter held out
and standing.

They were halfway back to the stairs when the second explosion shook the building.
The blast felt like being hit hard with a giant pillow.
Aunt Naggie stumbled and fell awkwardly to the floor.
All the lights went out.
Red emergency panels---completely off the network, with their own power supplies---kicked in
half a second later,
making the corridor look like something from a horror sim.
Half-deafened,
Iffy still heard the crash-after-crash of the shattered glass roof of the greenhouse
raining down on the plants below.

"I thought you said they were contained!" Wales shouted.

"They are!" Doctor Johel shouted back
as Iffy helped Aunt Naggie stand.
"That was outside, not the basement!"

Her foster mother cradled one arm in the other.
"I think my wrist's broke," she said,
her faced strained.

Another explosion,
then another,
further away but still loud enough to be felt as well as heard.
Wales took Doctor Johel's arm.
"We have to get out of here,"
he said urgently.
"Gayathri, no, now!"
He pulled her along as she protested.

Doctor Johel shook him off.
"I have to get back to my feeds.
The governor---"
And then Wales touched the back of her head.
Her eyes fluttered and her face went slack.

"Gayathri."
Wales shook her gently.
"Gayathri,
are you with me?"

Doctor Johel shook her head muzzily.
"Sorry..." she mumbled.
"I have to reboot."
She giggled incongruously.
"Feels like I had too much to..."

She would have toppled over if Wales hadn't caught her.
Swearing under his breath
he slung her over his shoulder.
"Follow me," he ordered.
"And stay close."

Iffy and Aunt Naggie had to jog to keep up with him
as he strode along the corridor and down the stairs.
"Where's medical?" he demanded of the first Marines they saw.

"Sir, I---"

"I said where's medical, soldier?" Wales snapped.
"Her tech may be compromised and she has a possible concussion."

"Second on the left, sir, then first right."
They paused a moment as data flowed across their visor.
"No structural damage there, sir.
You should be safe."

Iffy expected the infirmary to look like the hospital in Halley:
scanner beds with surgical bots attached to either end
and cartoon posters reminding people to get regular checkups
and put Volkov's hot sauce on everything.
Instead it had blank walls painted toothpaste blue
and was staffed by human medics in lightweight exoskeletons,
each with a bewildering variety of attachments on the arms.
She realized later it was for security---the last thing anyone would want during an attack
was to be at the mercy of a hacked surgical bot---but right then
all she could think was, *Honesty, where are you?*
because half a dozen Marines lay on stretchers or stood unconscious,
held up only by their armor
as they wait for help.

"Priority patient," Wales said,
sliding Doctor Johel off his shoulder.

"They're all priorities, sir,"
the medic said,
their eyes sparkling as they scanned the doctor's face.

Doctor Johel stirred.
"Ouch," she whimpered.
"Johnson---what?"

"It's okay," he said soothingly.
"You just rebooted, that's all.
You'll be back on your feet in no time."
As the medic lifted her weight out of Wales' arms,
he slipped his hand into his pocket.
"Come on," he told Iffy and Aunt Naggie.
"Let's let them work."

"Is she gonna be aright?"
Aunt Naggie asked anxiously as Wales led them back the way they had come.

"She'll be fine.
Her tech's a little sensitive, that's all."
He glanced around and then took Doctor Johel's security bracelet out of his pocket,
grinning like a naughty child.
"Now, do you two like heist sims?"

They walked past the stairs and the entrance they had come in,
stepping out of people and bots.
Iffy looked at every Marine who hurried past hoping to see Honesty,
but they either had their visors down or weren't her friend.

A side corridor brought them to a narrow flight of stairs
that led down to a blank door.
As Wales waved the bracelet in front of the lock
Iffy wondered if the governor would have them wiped if they were caught.
*Prolly not him,* she thought sourly as Wales tested the handle.
*They __need__ him.*

The door opened with a click.
An automatic light came on,
revealing two aisles lined with the same bamboo-and-wireframe shelves that Mister Mishra had in his shop.
Wales' toolbox sat among the boxes and duffel bags with his bear perched on top of it,
its blue eyes as dull as old buttons.

He stuffed the bear inside his coat and lifted the toolbox off the shelf.
"Right," he said briskly.
"Let's get the hell out of here."

Nobody stopped them.
*Nobody's even really lookin' at us,* Iffy realized.
Whether it was Doctor Johel's bracelet or something Wales had done,
the security systems seemed to be telling everyone
that they weren't worth paying attention to,
and as yet another explosion sounded in the distance,
everyone who might have wondered where they were going
had other things on their mind.

Honesty wasn't at the door but two other Marines were,
one so heavily augmented that they weren't wearing their exoskeleton
so much as built into it.
"Sixteen orange kneecap!" Wales barked,
holding up the security bracelet but not slowing down.

"How'd you get the code?"
Iffy hissed as they hurried across the square.

"Just made it up, but they don't know that.
Here."
He unzipped his jacket one-handed and passed her the toy bear.
"You should---"

*---the world slowed down as crisp colored lines painted themselves
across wireframe renderings of the buildings.
Iffy could see the cables beneath the street,
some so old that they were made of metal instead of glass fiber.
She could see information flowing through them
like waves rising and falling on the ocean
and other information leaping between people and bots and relays
like lightning sparking from one mast to another.
There and there and there
the signals tasted like salt and apricot jam
but they were coming together
and when they did---*

"Look out!" she shouted,
grabbing Aunt Naggie and pulling her down beside her
half a second before another explosion in the sky above them
made the grit on the cobblestones dance.

*I'm gonna need new ears,* Iffy thought,
wondering how much they'd cost and whether she and Aunt Naggie could get a discount
if they bought two pairs at the same time.
She was in shock, she realized dumbly.
It was if someone else was having the thought
and she was watching it through a window that hadn't been cleaned in a long, long time.
She was in shock and she'd been hacked or something like it
and being wiped would be the least of her worries if the governor found out.

Aunt Naggie was helping her up.
"Keep moving," Wales urged.
"No telling when the next one's going to---"

"Twenty-eight seconds," Iffy said.
She pointed up where vectors only she could see intersected.
"They're shootin' hypersonic darts.
They're all too small fer radar 'n' such t' pick up on their own---"

"---but when they all hit each other at the same time, kaboom," Wales finished.
He stared at her.
"Can you track back to their firing sites?"

The world swam before Iffy's eyes.
The vectors and information streams blurred and disappeared.
She bent over and threw up the tea and sweets she had enjoyed so much.

"I'm sorry," she mumbled.
"I'm sorry."

"Oh love," Aunt Naggie fretted,
taking Iffy's shoulders to steady her.

"Ten seconds," Wales warned, covering his ears.
Iffy did the same,
but Aunt Naggie squeezed her eyes shut and held onto her foster daughter.

*Crack!*

Iffy's overlays reappeared as suddenly as they had vanished.
She spat,
which didn't improve the taste in her mouth one bit,
and waved weakly toward the harbor.
"There's one out that way,
'bout fifteen kay offshore,
an' another bearin' forty five degrees,
same distance or nearly."
She straightened,
shrugging off Aunt Naggie and taking a shaky breath.
"Th' other two are inland," she continued.
"They're movin' between each shot.
Movin' fast,"
she added.

Aunt Naggie looked at Wales wide-eyed.
"What're  you doin' to her?" she asked plaintively.

"Me!?"
Wales exclaimed.
"I'm not doing this.
Even if I could, I wouldn't do it to her, I swear.
Now come on---we have to get back to the *Guinevere* and get out of here."

"Get out o' here?"
Aunt Naggie shook her head.
"We won't get ten meters 'fore they stop us."

"We will if the antenna Iffy put together last night does what it's supposed to,"
Wales said grimly.
"Now come on."

Iffy only remembered flashes of the next hour afterward.
Glass scattered on the road like ice crystals on deck during a midwinter freeze.
Aunt Naggie wiping her bleeding nose and arguing with Wales.
A quartet of Marines jogging past with impossibly long strides in their exoskeletons,
one of them carrying a bundle wrapped in a bright orange parka stained with red.
A seagull swooping down to pilfer a dropped box of spring rolls.
A woman with long purple locks in a dressing gown exactly the same color
shouting a warning or a plea or a question or maybe all three.
A cleaning bot sweeping rubble off to the side of the road.
More people,
adults and children ducking each time an explosion cracked in the air above them.
The dock,
impossibly far away but suddenly somehow under their feet,
and then the *Guinevere*.

"Where'n th' affin' hell have you been?"
Uncle Jack raged as Aunt Naggie helped Iffy up the gangplank,
murder in his drink-reddened eyes.

Without waiting for a reply he turned to block Wales' way.
"Like hell are you comin' back on my ship," he spat.
"You bin nothin' but bad luck 'n' trouble
an' I've had enough o' both.
An' don't you 'but Jack' me,"
he continued,
turning back to his wife.
"*I'm* th' captain an' *I* say what goes an' what doesn't
an' if you don't like it you can find another affin' ship to sail on!
An' you can take that whimperin' soft nonsense o' yours with you when you go!"

He turned back to Wales.
"Now, you get your stern back down on that pier right affin' now or I'm gonna---"

The gaff hook hit the back of his head with a solid thunk.
For the second time that day he fell senseless to the deck.

Aunt Naggie hefted the gaff hook,
waiting to be sure he was out before setting it back on the wall.
"Been wantin' to do that for years,"
she said levelly.

## Chapter 8

Iffy sat in the pilot house,
Wales' toy bear lifeless in her lap,
while Aunt Naggie brought the *Guinevere* to life.
Wales untied the staylines and secured the deck
with an economy of motion that betrayed years of experience,
either earned or inducted.

"I'll get you some of Ignacio's medicine soon as we're under way,"
Aunt Naggie promised over her shoulder.

Iffy nodded.
"Thanks, auntie."
She could feel her head clearing like an image coming into focus.
Whatever had happened was gone again,
as unreal to her now as a dream.
She was hungry,
she realized,
starving hungry despite the sour taste that still lingered in her mouth.

She was about to offer to make some tea when Wales' voice came over the speaker.
"All clear here."

"Nothin' ventured," Aunt Naggie muttered,
her hands dancing across the controls.
The *Guinevere*'s engines thrummed to life.
As they pulled away from the pier
Iffy looked at the feed from the forward cameras
that showed Uncle Jack lying on the pier with his coat pillowed under his head.

"Won't be the same 'round here without him," she said.

Her foster mother nodded.
"You're right.
It'll be better.
Assumin' nobody sinks us, that is."

"Maybe even then,"
Iffy replied.
Aunt Naggie leaned over and kissed the top of her head.

The *Guinevere*'s new captain brought the ship around in a tight arc
that left them pointing straight at the harbor mouth.
Iffy watched on the displays as sentry torpedoes came toward them and then veered away.
Drones did the same overhead
as their cores' instinct to investigate was overridden by whatever the antenna on deck was telling them.
She glanced down at the toy bear from time to time,
half-expecting it to be back online,
but whether it was either off or hibernating or simply biding its time,
its blue eyes stayed lifeless.

"You know,
half the time when the machines won battles
it was because people acted like machines,"
Wales said as he joined them.
He gestured at a sleek Marine destroyer at anchor a hundred meters away.
Half a dozen crew stood on deck watching them go by.
"They have to be wondering why we're moving when nothing else is,
or why we're allowed out to sea when Rothera is under attack,
but as long as the ship's core tells them it's okay,
they'll tell themselves we must be some sort of special ops mission
or have friends in dark places.
Which for all I know is actually true,"
he finished philosophically.

"I'm sorry,"
Iffy said.
"I don't know why it happens.
I don't even know what 'it' *is*.
But you do, don't you?"
She was angry, she realized.
She hadn't meant for it to sound like an accusation,
but now that the words were out she couldn't stop.
"You know what's goin' on with me."

"An' you," she continued to Aunt Naggie before either of the adults could speak.
"That medicine you been feedin' me---you *knew*,
di'n't you?
All this time I been wonderin' what's wrong with me 'cuz I can see how machines work,
an' you *knew*."

Wales and Aunt Naggie exchanged looks.
She nodded almost imperceptibly.
He crossed his arms and leaned his broad shoulders against the pilot house door.
"Let me tell you a story," he said quietly.

"Once upon a time,
way back when before everything fell apart,
people dreamed of going to the stars.
We made it to the Moon,
and a few ships got as far as Mars,
but it was just too hard and too expensive to put people into space.
Bots could do everything we could do,
and they didn't need air or water,
and anyway,
we had bigger problems to solve at home."

"But a few people kept dreaming.
They thought that maybe if we had a different kind of human being we could make it work.
We were already tweaking people to cure diseases.
A few labs here and there were making them stronger and faster,
and everyone was trying to figure out how to make people smarter.
Why not go a little further and make a better astronaut?
Why not give them super-dense bones so they could handle higher gee during liftoff
and hypermelanic skin so that they wouldn't have to worry about ultraviolet exposure?
Why not borrow a few ideas from bears so that they could hibernate for months at a time?
And if you're going to do all of that,
why not put some tech in their heads so that they can talk to their ships?"

Wales kept his eyes on the *Guinevere*'s displays as he splke.
"Doctor Johel's grandfather was the lead scientist on the program.
He made half a dozen of us before the government cut off his funding.
We were everything he'd promised,
but the water was rising and people were going hungry and starting to march,
and making spacemen in test tubes just didn't seem important any more."
He laughed humorlessly.
"Plus,
I guess a few of his backers hadn't realized that 'hyper-melanic' meant we'd be black.
Apparently they weren't too happy about that."

"I never got into space.
One of my sisters did,
once,
but I haven't heard from any of them in a hundred and fifty years.
I've spent half of that time asleep
and the rest of it looking for bits and pieces of gear
to keep the tech in my head from shorting out."

"So that's why you can talk to satellites?" Iffy ventured.

Wales nodded.
"Yup.
And that's why I need to get to Mount Tyree.
When the revolution came,
the government in London packed up all its secret projects and sent them down here.
If what I need to fix my head is anywhere, it's there."

"An' what about *my* head?" Iffy asked.

"Ain't nothin' wrong with your head," Aunt Naggie said firmly.
"It's just takin' you a while to---to get used t' things."

"One of Professor Johel's other experiments was enhanced spatial reasoning,"
Wales explained.
"AIs were designing machines that did amazing things,
but nobody could understand how they worked.
That scared a lot of people,
so Surjinder---Professor Johel---told them
he could make a person who'd be able to figure them out and explain them to the rest of us."

Iffy's mouth worked as a dozen questions tried to get out at once.
"So my First was some kind of experiment?"

Wales shook his head.
"Not the First you knew when you were little---not by a hundred years or more.
She would have been a clone herself.
She might not have known the story herself.
And anyway, it didn't work---not until you came along."

"Raniere used t' work in the hospital in Puerto Toro," Aunt Naggie cut in.
"He helped make you an' your mothers.
When he heard about---about the accident an' you bein' the only one rescued,
he came down an' found me an' told me that there'd been a glitch when they were makin' you.
They had t' put a bit o' tech in your head when you were still inside your older
so your brain would grow right."

"A synaptic bridge."
Wales held his thumb and finger a hair's width apart.
"Just a smart piece of wire to help your cortex do its job,
but somehow it did what Professor Johel couldn't.
You can see machines the way cores do.
You can see how things fit together."

He straightened.
"But you mustn't tell Gayathri.
She knows where your olders came from.
So far she thinks everything we've done together is me testing you.
If she realizes what you can do..."

Iffy nodded.
She had played enough sims to know what happened to people with special abilities,
and she definitely didn't want to spend the rest of her life
locked in an underground lab being experimented on by someone named Norman
whose only friend was a malicious bot with a squeaky wheel.

They reached the rocky point that sheltered Rothera's harbor in just a few minutes.
Iffy watched the scavenged remains of the old research station pass by to starboard.
Honesty had told her once that it was haunted---that on quiet nights
the ghosts of the scientists who had once lived there
came out to try to finish their experiments.
"What experiments were they don'?" Iffy had asked.
Honesty had laughed and said that wasn't the point,
and that Iffy was the most practical person they'd ever met.

"Whaddaya think it's tellin' 'em we are?" she asked Wales,
jerking her chin at the image of the antenna on the control panel.

He shrugged.
"No idea.
And I have no idea who sent you the specs, either.
But that reminds me---how much of the complement mediator do you have left?"

"Y'mean her medicine?" Aunt Naggie asked.
"Enough fer a coupla months,
maybe three if we stretch it."

Wales pursed his lips.
"I don't think we should.
If anything,
we should be increasing the dosage."

"Any idea where we can get more?"

Wales snorted.
"I'm going to start to sound like a broken sim,
but if we can get to Mount Tyree
I ought to be able to print a lifetime supply."

Instead of answering,
Aunt Naggie tapped a few commands on the *Guinevere*'s console.
A map appeared showing the coastline,
the winds and currents,
recent sea boils,
and a bent red line marking the optimal course from Rothera
to the small outpost at Paddington South.
"Six days if we don't hit trouble," she said,
tapping the screen with a blunt brown finger.

Wales smiled.
"In other words,
we have no idea how long it will take."

The map disappeared.
*PRIORITY MESSAGE* flashed on the screen for a second,
then was replaced by Uncle Jack's angry face.
He got as far as, "You---" before Aunt Naggie hit the mute button.
The core's transcript of his threats and orders scrolled by,
every third word marked "abusive content and/or threat of violence".

A horrible thought struck Iffy.
"He can't remote us, can he?"

"Not any more," Aunt Naggie told her.
"An' when he gets around t' callin' on the registry
I think he'll find he has less claim on this old boat than he thought he did."
She patted the side of the console fondly,
then made her husband disappear with another tap of her finger.

Iffy surprised herself by yawning.
"Here."
She handed the toy bear to Wales.
"I'm gonna..."
She yawned again,
waved vaguely at her foster mother's, "Sleep well, love,"
and headed for her storage locker.

She detoured a few steps to study the antenna at the stern,
which looked just as normal as it had that morning,
then shrugged,
retraced her steps to her room,
and closed the door behind her.
She dropped her jacket beside her boots and fell onto her mattress.

Her app made a soft *ping* just as she closed her eyes.
"Affin' hell," she swore,
pulling her pillow over her head.
*Ping.*
She swore again,
rolled over,
and tapped the screen.

And sat bolt upright,
her headache and fatigue forgotten.
The dronelet she had sent to find Honesty had a message for her.

It took the image a hearbeat to uncompress.
Iffy gulped.
First and Second were looking straight into the camera,
and neither of them looked happy.
The image blanked and re-formed.
Second was holding their app up for the camera to see.
"Do u know whr H?" was scrawled across its screen.
Blank, blur, and a third image.
"Not home gvnr say null worried."

Iffy tapped her app with trembling fingers.
The feeds were filled with reports of the attack,
some official and others coded anywhere from reliable green
to dubious yellow
to kaiju-wizards-and-time-travellers red.
People were dead and it would take weeks to repair the damage,
but nobody had claimed responsibility---nobody credible, anyway.
The Zillions said it wasn't them,
the government in Hobart denied anything was afoot,
and the machines were silent as always.

She pulled up a map with a network overlay.
They were already too far from Rothera for her app to connect,
and she had no idea if using the ship's comms to send a message
would bungle whatever fuzz the antenna at the stern was making
to convince the world they weren't there or weren't themselves.
She could send one of the other dronelets back,
but she didn't want to lose another and anyway,
the dronelet wouldn't even make it halfway.

She leaned back against the wall in defeat,
then jumped as the ship's speakers bonged.
"Best be on deck," Aunt Naggie's voice said.
"You'll wanna see this."

Thirty seconds later she stood at the stern beside Wales and her foster mother.
It was a relatively calm day---the breeze brushing fingers over her shaved scalp
was cold but not to shivering,
and the rise and fall of the deck beneath her feet felt so normal
that she barely noticed it.
Under other circumstances she would have enjoyed being out in the Antarctic sun,
but the Marine destroyer closing on them spoiled that.

"It's the *Bengal*," Wales said,
handing the glasses he had donned a moment before to Iffy.
"She was anchored three piers over from us in Rothera.
Two cores, three engines, four crew, a dozen Marines,
and enough ordnance to give your average pirate a really bad day."
He smiled humorlessly.
"Gayathri must be *really* upset with me."

Iffy donned the glasses and waited for them to enhance the scene.
The *Bengal* looked like it had been built yesterday rather than almost a century ago.
The intricate sensor-baffling whorls on her hull
made Iffy's eyes swim when she looked at them too long,
but the waves that rocked the *Guinevere* slid past the *Bengal*
like someone turning their shoulders to avoid bumping into a bully on the street.

Iffy felt almost hungry thinking about what her engines must look like.
Two in the stern and one amidships as insurance against a torpedo strike,
each one with its own broad-mouthed intakes and narrow jet exhausts,
the channels connecting them full of micro-gears arranged in concentric rings
to maximize the power-to-thrust ratios of---

Her head swam.
She clutched the railing and squeezed her eyes shut.
She could *see* the *Bengal*'s engines as if they were laid out on a screen,
the parts exploded and zoomed to make every intricate detail clear.

She swallowed back her nausea and offered the glasses to Aunt Naggie,
who waved them away.
"I hope we have enough tea," was all she said.

"Because Rothera's core ran a few sims,"
Doctor Johel told Wales half an hour later
after the *Bengal* had come alongside the *Guinevere*
and she had come aboard with a trio of Marines as escort.
"A few billion, actually, and it calculated that this configuration gave us our best odds."

"Best odds of what?"
Wales asked.

Doctor Johel's eyes glittered.
"Of finding out what the hell is going on."

Iffy barely heard them.
She stared at one of the Marines standing at attention in their exoskeleton
three steps away.
It couldn't be.

But Doctor Johel saw the expression on Iffy's face.
"Ah, yes," she purred.
"That was another of the core's recommendations."
She beckoned the Marine forward.
"I believe you two know each other?"

"Honesty?" Iffy somehow managed to say.

The Marine flipped their visor up.
"Hello Iffy."
Her voice was as stiff as her back and shoulders.

"Don't worry," Doctor Johel told Iffy.
"Everyone's like that for the first few days."
She'll be herself in no time."

"More or less," Wales muttered.
He took the tea that Aunt Naggie offered him and passed it to Doctor Johel,
then took the next one for himself and slurped a mouthful.
"I suppose they'll be wanting the tour?"

"Thank you.
And I'd like a look at the controls if I may?
On my own?"
Doctor Johel's tone made it clear that it wasn't actually a request.

Wales waited for her to go before turning to Iffy,
who hadn't taken her eyes off Honesty.
"Just give your friend some time," he said gently.
"And don't worry too much about anything she says.
It's just the induction talking."

Iffy nodded jerkily.
"I know.
I just---I keep thinkin' about how Jeep changed up."

Wales shrugged.
"Sometimes it doesn't all go away.
Sometimes it rearranges what was there before.
And sometimes it shows people things about themselves they'd rather not have known.
Just give her some time."

Iffy glanced toward the antenna at the stern.
"Now that they know where we are,
is it aright if I send her folks a message?
They gotta be worried fierce."

Wales shrugged again.
"Can't hurt."

After anguishing for a few minutes
Iffy decided to send a simple text message instead of talking live.
*Sorry about the drone,* she tapped awkwardly.
*We on our way to Halley.
The Marines are here n Honesty is with em.
They look aright.*
Iffy bit her lip.
*Dont sound like themself but eryone says not to worry on it.
I will tell them you said gday.
Sorry gain about the drone I was just worried.*
She hit send before she could lose her courage
and then tossed her app aside and waved the light off,
knowing that sleep would be a long time coming.

Iffy had spent hours gazing at the pictures in her older's nature book
that showed blue tropical oceans full of fish and coral.
The ocean that the *Guinevere* and the *Bengal* sailed through
for the next three days
looked nothing like that.
When the sky was blue,
the sea was a liquid gray.
When clouds rolled in and threatened a storm,
as they did at least once a day,
the gray turned somber.
Even the white crests of the waves seemed dirty.

The news from Rothera did nothing to improve their mood.
The town's governor had survived,
but was still not admitting that the attack had been launched by his clone in Halley.
The pravda on the government feeds blamed rogue machines,
and Iffy wondered whether French Henry was all right.
She wondered about Uncle Jack too,
until she realized that she wasn't worried about him
so much as about what trouble he might still cause.

Iffy's mood sank even further on their fourth day.
One of the *Bengal*'s drones spotted an unevenness in the water.
After dithering for a millisecond,
the destroyer's core decided it might mean that a sea boil was brewing,
so the two ships turned toward shore
and ran straight into a slick of dead jellyfish.
For the rest of the day the air didn't just smell like wet rot---it *tasted* of it.
Aunt Naggie boiled a precious spoonful of dried lemon rind to chase the smell out of the galley,
but dinner's noodles still tasted like rank seaweed.

"It could be anything,"
Wales said when Iffy asked him what he thought had happened.
He had spent most of the first two days in his cabin,
coming out only to eat and use the toilet
under the supervision of whichever Marines were on the *Guinevere* at the time.
"See that?"
He leaned on the railing to point at the blistered caps and shredded tentacles drifting below.
"There and there.
And there.
Looks like some kind of infection has been eating at them."
He shook his head,
anger and disappointment on his face.
"Could be natural,
but more likely someone crisped it up in a lab."

"You think it was the Zillions?" Iffy asked.

Wales shook his head.
"I doubt it.
This was probably someone trying to tweak them so they would trap plastic more efficiently."
At Iffy's puzzled look he waved his arm toward the slick again.
"That's why they were originally tweaked---to filter all the tiny bits of plastic out of the water."

"Like the barnacles filter the metal?" Iffy said.

Wales nodded.
"It made sense at the time, in a desperate kind of way,
but it never really worked.
The only thing that *did* work was the accelerated growth."

"I read about that in school---how they ate up everythin'
so most o' the fish starved an' everythin' fell apart."
Iffy frowned.
"Never read anything about it bein' so they could trap plastic, though."

Wales shrugged.
"That was buried pretty deeply after it went wrong.
Nobody wanted to admit they'd broken the oceans."
He stared bleakly at the ruin in the water.
"The clathrate bubbles feed the microorganisms the jellyfish eat,
which is why the best jelly dredging is where the sea is most likely to boil.
It's just one more disaster among many.
And every time we try to put one of them right
it seems we just tangle things up worse."

Iffy watched the lumpy slick slide by for a second,
then reached over and punched his shoulder.
"For bein' so gloomy," she said firmly.
"You're a lot more fun when you're all smiley an' such."

Doctor Johel paid the *Guinevere* a visit that afternoon,
her first since leaving port.
The *Bengal* had two swift gunboats capable of carrying four Marines in full combat exoskeletons,
but she chose instead to be carried over by a drone.
Two Marines flew beside her like mechanical angels,
while one of the ultralight spotters that had been high overhead since Rothera
circled over them.

Doctor Johel touched down on the aft deck as gently as a snowflake.
Her carrier drone hovered patiently over her
while she undid the harness she wore over her long coat,
then folded its twin manipulators back into its under-carriage
and settled into the recharging station on the roof of the pilot house.

Her escorts' landings were not nearly as graceful.
One of them stumbled as an unexpected heave of the deck threw them off balance.
*Are they flying manually?* Iffy wondered.
People sometimes did that in the last desperate moments of stories,
when the enemy's malware had somehow gotten past their defenses
and cripped their cores,
but she had never seen anyone do it in real life.
Was it a training exercise of some kind?

She was about to ask Wales when the Marine on the left took off their helmet
and stood to attention.
Honesty's hair had grown back to a light fuzz,
but their face was as empty of feeling as it had been when Iffy had last seen them.

Wales nudged Iffy with his elbow.
"Here," he said quietly,
rapping the back of her hand with his knuckles.
She took the thimble-sized object he passed to her.
As the pilot house door banged open behind her,
she tucked her hands back in her pockets.

Aunt Naggie poked her head out of the pilot house.
"Permission to come aboard, captain?" Doctor Johel asked.
"And yes, I realize it's a bit late to ask, but it *is* protocol."

Half a dozen responses tripped over each other trying to get out of Aunt Naggie's mouth.
Finally she pointed at the angel wings Doctor Johel's escorts had detached from their exoskeletons.
"You should strap 'em down," she said.
Then she looked at Iffy and mouthed the word "captain",
tapping her chest with one finger.
Iffy suppressed a grin.

Even if the galley had been the size of the Dance Hall market,
Iffy wouldn't have been invited.
But Aunt Naggie had a tray of tea and freshly-steamed dumplings ready.
"You keep out o' the way 'til we're done," she urged Iffy under her breath.

Iffy nodded.
"I will," she promised,
fingering the earbug Wales had given her.

Iffy made sure the lock on her door was snibbed before putting in the earbug.
It hummed as it hunted the airwaves for the faint electronic warble of Wales' signal.
"Come on," she muttered.
The Marines all wore scramblers and sniffers,
and Doctor Johel was undoubtedly even better protected.
It would be a miracle if anything could get through,
but she was starting to think that Wales made miracles
the way Aunt Naggie made curry.

"---but as a sign of our good intentions,
we will rotate Corporal Macklin off to the *Bengal*,"
Doctor Johel's voice suddenly said.
"Private Honesty's Third will take his place until we reach Paddington South.
Now,
shall we have our tea before it goes cold?
And these buns look delicious.
Are these shaved carrots?"

The conversation turned to pleasantries about the food and the weather.
Bored,
Iffy took out the earbug and pulled out her older's nature book.
"I wish you could talk,"
she told the orangutan on the cover.
Not for the first time,
she wished she could have flashes of insight now and then about what to say to people
instead of just about machinery.
With a sigh, she got to her feet.

A whisper of static from the earbug caught her attention.
She reinserted it in her ear just in time to hear Doctor Johel say,
"---any sign of special abilities?"

"I don't think so,"
Wales replied.
*Speaker shakes head,* the caption voice added.
"She has a lot of natural talent,
but I haven't seen any sign there's anything more to her than that."

"That's a shame."
*Speaker adopts skeptical expression.*
"The core thought there was an eighty-five percent chance the tweak would have been passed on."

*Speaker sighs.*
"Gayathri, please---you know I don't like that word."

*Speaker smiles.*
"I remember you and Grandfather used to argue about it when you came to visit.
He thought people with modifications should embrace the term and make it their own."

This time Iffy heard the sigh.
"And as I used to say to him,
it's easier to feel that way when no one has ever thrown rocks at you.
But coming back to Fifth,
part of your grandfather's work was to create *modifications*
that couldn't be detected by simple genetic tests.
Cloning is never perfect---any glitch could have thrown the collaborating genes out of balance."
*Speaker shakes head.*
"Or maybe we're just too early.
Maybe in another couple of years---"

"We don't have another couple of years," Doctor Johel cut in.
"I'm *old*, Johnson,
and you've already lasted decades longer than you were supposed to."

*Speaker shrugs.*
"Well, the agency always did over-engineer things."

*Speakers hug.*
"I'm glad they did," Doctor Johel said in a muffled voice.
*Speaker wipes away tear.*
"Some days I'd give anything to be back in London drinking hot chocolate
and listening to you and Grandfather set the world right."

"Well, you can still have the chocolate," Wales said.

Doctor Johel made a noise.
"That stuff the governor grows is *not* chocolate."
*Hug ends.*
"Besides,
what's gone is gone,
Johnson,
and what's done is done."

"So they say," Wales replied softly.

After a moment the earbug chimed.
*Signal ends,* it told Iffy.
She took it out and weighed it in her hand,
then picked up her nature book and stared at the cover without really seeing it.
She had been careful not to think about her pet rat in a long time,
but now all she could feel was the dregs of the panicky sadness that she had almost drowned in
after she and Aunt Naggie had given up looking for it.
Was she going to feel that way about Honesty if the induction didn't wear off?
Was everything she loved going to be taken away from her bit by bit?
"Why's it all got to be so hard?" she whispered,
wishing someone was there to answer.

They passed the ruins of Bharati a few hours later.
The little town had been founded as a research station on the opposite side of the continent.
When the sea rose,
its inhabitants had decided that if they had to pack up and move,
they might as well move all the way to the Peninsula.
Two thousand people had made the journey and built new homes,
only to have them destroyed in a midwinter fire.

Twenty years on,
what was left of those homes stood in mute rows
on either side of the little river their builders had christened the Ganges.
Iffy stood at the railing and watch as the approached,
slid by,
and receded into the distance,
her mood as dark as the scorched cinder blocks.
A single lonely gull circled the *Guinevere* once and then coasted away.
It was the grayest,
most depressing scene Iffy could imagine,
so she went back to her cabin to feel sorry for herself.

The sudden blare of the *Guinevere*'s horn a few minutes later made her jump.
"What now?" she groaned,
wiping tears away with her sleeve
before standing up and yanking open her door.

The horn's second blare was punctuated by the staccato chatter of gunfire.
A row of tiny black holes stitched across the deck two meters in front of Iffy.
For a moment all she could do was stare.
*Those are bullet holes,* she thought stupidly.
*Somebody is shooting at us.*

A dazzling streak of lightning half-blinded her.
A moment later the smoking carcass of a military drone tumbled into the sea
and exploded with a sharp *crack!*

Boots thudded on the deck.
"Citizen! Take cover!" the Marine ordered,
the pop-up guns on the shoulder pauldrons of their exoskeleton whirring
from one position to another
as its tiny onboard core evaluated potential threats.
An armored hand closed on Iffy's arm and pushed her back against the wall.

"What's happening?" Iffy demanded.

"We are under attack," the Marine said,
shielding Iffy with their body as a second drone whined overhead.
Another brief burst of staccato and another streak of lightning,
but the drone danced sideways just in time
so that the plasma burst from the gun at the *Guinevere*'s stern only singed it.
It turned sharply and dove toward the ship.

The Marine spun around and raised their arm to point at the incoming drone,
keeping their exoskeleton between Iffy and the attack.
The guns on their shoulders aimed and fired.
The drone staggered and zoomed away,
its remaining three rotors whining to make up for the fourth that had just been disintegrated.

The Marine straightened up and turned to Iffy.
The visor on their helmet snapped open.
"Are you all right, citizen?" Honesty demanded.

"I---I'm fine," Iffy said shakily.

"Good."
Their visor closed with a click.
"Please assist with damage repair."

"Wait!"
Iffy caught Honesty's arm as they turned to go.
"Who was that? Who was attacking us?"

"The drones appear to be Brazilian, citizen," Honesty reported impassively.
"Now excuse me---I need to join my unit to repel boarders."

"To what?"
And then the *Guinevere*'s horn blared again
as something that looked like a cloudy jellyfish
pulled itself over the railing and squelched toward them.

Honesty's first three shots went straight through it
to punch lethal little holes in the ship's deck.
"Stand back, citizen!" they ordered
as they pulled a micro-grenade the size of their thumb
out of the clip on their exoskeleton's sleeve and primed it.

"No!" Wales shouted, running toward them.
He tackled Iffy just as the grenade hit the jellyfish and exploded.

*BOOM!*
The shock threw Iffy and Wales across the deck.
For a moment she lay in a daze while the world spun around her.

Something grabbed her arm.
She shrieked, but it was Wales, not the jellyfish.
"I can't hear you!" she yelled,
her ears still ringing from the blast.

He pulled her to her feet.
*There's a hole in the ship,* she thought muzzily.
It was right where the jellyfish had been
and big enough for her and Aunt Naggie to sit in.

But where was Honesty?
She looked around wildly,
then shrieked again as another plasma burst lanced the blue sky over her head.

"Come on!" Wales said, his voice muffled but audible.
"We have to get out of here!"
He pulled her toward the stern.

"No!"
She tried to shake him off but his grip was too strong.
"What happened? Where'd she go?"

Instead of answering,
Wales picked her up and slung her over his shoulder
like a sack of rice and charged.
She beat his parka with her fists,
yelling at him to put her down, put her *down*, she had to find Honesty,
but he paid no more attention to her than he did to the spray from the waves.

Nothing was left of the gray tent the Marines had set up at the *Guinevere*'s stern
except a few smoldering tatters of canvas.
Their plasma gun was a gleaming headless mantis
surrounded by stacks of cubical capacitors clicked together like children's toys.
It snapped this way and that as its little core searched for targets to destroy.
The two Marines guarding it moved with the same unnatural insect jerkiness,
firing occasionally when the smaller cores built into their exoskeletons calculated that
they had at least some chance of hitting something.

"Citizen! Seek shelter!" one of them bellowed,
his voice amplified by his helmet.

Wales skidded to a stop and dropped Iffy to the deck.
"For gubbins sake tell everyone to stop throwing grenades at them!"
he yelled at the Marine.
"They're made of some kind of exothermic biomaterial---they're bombs!"
The Marine nodded sharply and relayed the information through his helmet mike.

Iffy grabbed Wales' sleeve.
"But where's Honesty?" she demanded.
Her friend couldn't be dead.
Iffy pushed the thought away in panic.
She just *couldn't* be.

"I don't know," Wales said, scanning the horizon.
"Look---there!" He pointed.
"What are they trying to do?"

Iffy followed his pointing finger.
Eight, ten---at least a dozen drones were circling in the *Guinevere*'s wake,
buzzing the ship and dodging erratically to avoid fire from the Marines.

"It's like they're waitin' fer somethin'," Iffy said.
"More o' those jellyfish bombs maybe?"

Wales started to shake his head, then froze and swore.
"What?" Iffy demanded,
but he ignored her while his lips moved silently.

His eyes widened.
"They're trying to draw fire from orbit," he breathed.
"You! Tell Doctor Johel there's a Chinese satellite going over head in---"
He hesitated. "---in six hundred and seventy seconds.
They're trying to make a hot spot to draw its fire.
If we're underneath them---"

"Understood, citizen," the Marine said.
He began speaking urgently into his helmet mike once again.

Wales seized Iffy by the shoulders.
"You have to get off this ship," he said,
low and urgent.
"If the Marines can't bring those things down,
that satellite's going to shoot them down,
and if they're above us when it does,
we'll be dead in the water."

"I ain't runnin'," Iffy said, shaking him off.
She was about to add,
and even if I was, where would I go and how,
when something hauled itself over the stern railing.

"Look out!" Wales shouted.
He pulled Iffy close and spun around to shelter her with his body.

"N-n-no need for p-p-panic, citizen."
A battered Marine hauled themself onto the ship.
Icy water gushed out between the gaps between the dark blue armor plates of their exoskeleton.

Honesty's visor snapped up.
Thy looked blankly at Iffy and Wales,
then at the two Marines beside the plasma gun.
"I require medical assistance," they said calmly,
and toppled over in a pool of seawater and blood.

"Honesty!"
Iffy scrambled across the deck to her friend.
"Honesty, wake up!
Please, please, wake up!"

## Chapter 9

Strong hands pulled her away.
"No!" she screamed,
struggling to free herself from Wales' grip.

"Let them help her!" he yelled in her ear
as a Marine crouched beside Honesty and began unlocking their armor.

The plasma gun spun and flared again,
sending another drone tumbling into the sea.
"Where are they all coming from!?" Wales demanded.

"They're the *Bengal*'s, sir,"
the Marine on the gun yelled back conversationally,
his imprinting keeping him unnaturally calm.
"The Zillions hacked them somehow.
Doctor Johel is trying to get them back under control,
but she's lost the network connection."
His armor automatically ducked as a shot from a passing drone ricocheted off a nearby hatch.
"I'm afraid I cannot fully assist my comrade until they are dispersed."

Iffy looked at Honesty.
All of a sudden she knew what she had to do.
"Let go of me!" she yelled at Wales.
"I have to get below!"

"No! You're safer here!"

"I gotta help them! Please!"
Wales hesitated a moment,
then released his grip.
She twisted past him and sprinted back to where they had been.

Waves threw spray into the air
each time they caught on the edge of the hole the jellyfish bomb had made.
Just as she reached her door one splashed higher than ever,
knocking her sideways off her feet.
She slid across the deck,
scrabbling uselessly to grab on to something, anything,
that would stop her from falling into the sea.

Her boot found a railing post.
Heart pounding,
she waited until the *Guinevere* rose on the crest of the next wave,
then scrambled to her feet and lunged for her door.
A quick twist, a yank, and she was inside.

She slammed the door shut behind her and slid to the floor,
shaking with fear and cold.
She was soaking wet.
Water was slopping into her room through the crack between the door and the deck
and pooling underneath her
and all she could think was,
*This is going to take forever to clean up.*

Somehow she got her feet underneath her.
Somehow she stood,
or at least un-fell down.
She pulled the box of dronelets out from under her mattress and fumbled it open,
her fingers clumsy with cold.

"C'mon, c'mon, c'mon," she muttered,
staring at them so hard her forehead started to ache.
There had to be something she could do with them or to them or *something*.

The deck shuddered beneath her as another jellyfish bomb exploded.
The *Guinevere* couldn't take much more,
and Honesty---if she didn't stop the attack,
what would happen to Honesty?
"Come *on*!" she pleaded.
Why couldn't she just know stuff?
Why did it have to be so affing *random*?

And then she had it.
She knew what to do,
but she had to help Honesty first.
She stuffed the dronelets into her pockets,
grabbed a couple of tools,
and closed her eyes.
A second image appeared in her head,
except that was wrong.
It wasn't an image: it was just *knowing*.
Wales' tools were still in the engine room.
She could go forward and hope that the Marines hadn't dogged the hatches, or---

She yanked her door open before she had time to think about how stupid her plan was.
Up and down the ship went,
waves booming beneath them.
As the *Guinevere* rose again she threw herself face-forward onto the deck
and slid toward the bomb hole,
looking for all the world like one of the long-ago penguins in her nature book,
except they had been black and white instead of dirty gray
and hadn't screamed in terror as they slid.

Her hand caught the railing post.
She turned sideways as the ship began to drop into the trough of the next wave
and let her legs fall into the hole.
There!
She didn't know what her feet had found,
but it was sturdy enough to take her weight.
Panting,
she let go of the railing and let herself scrape and drop into the ship
just as another wave crashed down.

A single light strip flickered over Iffy's head
as she straightened up in water that reached to her knees.
The ship's hold stank of metal and coal and old jellyfish.
Iffy undogged the locker door with fumbling frozen fingers
nd pulled out the red duffel bag that held the ship's emergency medical kit.

Wales had dragged Honesty over against the stern wall of the pilot house
and was kneeling beside her when Iffy reached them.
"Good girl," he said,
taking the duffel bag she thrust at him and setting it beside her fallen friend.
"Her exo stopped her bleeding,
but there's shrapnel in her right lung and her intestines.
 He looked up at her.
"You okay to help?"

"Just tell me what t' do," Iffy said grimly.

Wales pulled off his gloves
and  peeled the false skin back from the pad of his right forefinger.
Tiny lights danced across the small silver patch of tech beneath.
"Help me here."
Together they gently lifted Honesty's shoulder,
ignoring the sizzle and whack of the gun three meters away.
Wales flipped open a flat panel on the exoskeleton's pauldron
and touched his finger to the little optical port hidden beneath it.

A shiver ran up his spine.
Without warning he sneezed twice in quick succession.
"Stupid," he muttered,
whether at himself or the exoskeleton's security protocols or the world,
Iffy couldn't tell.

A light began blinking in the silver plate set into his temple.
"Wait... wait... now!"
He pointed at a buckle on the exoskeleton just as it clicked.
Iffy yanked it open.
Underneath,
Honesty's Marine blue thermals were almost black with their blood.

"Get a scalpel from the bag, and some tissue glue," Wales ordered.
"I have to keep the suit from---damn it.
Hang on."
The little guns on Honesty's shoulders swivelled suddenly to point at him,
then at Iffy,
then back at him.
"Okay. Do it now."

The guns woke up twice more as Iffy operated.
Seawater splashed on Honesty despite their best efforts to shield her.
It splashed on them too,
though Iffy barely noticed.
Every few moments Wales muttered another curse
as the exoskeleton's tiny core cycled tried yet another trick from its defensive repertoire.

One, two, three, four... Five.
She put the last twist of jagged metal in the medical kit's sharps' box,
laid a thin slice of re-flesh in the wound,
and glued her friend closed.
"'Zat it?" she asked breathlessly.

Wales closed his eyes.
"That's everything the exo can see.
You'd better back away for this next bit."
He jerked his head toward the corner of the pilot house when she hesitated.

Iffy reluctantly retreated a few steps,
the duffel bag in her hand.
Wales shifted his weight slightly and took his finger off the exoskeleton's data port.

The two guns on Honesty's pauldrons snapped sideways to point at his head.
"Easy," Wales said softly,
folding the flap of false skin back over his finger.
"Easy there.
We were just putting them back together.
No harm done."

The guns tracked him as he slowly stood up and backed away, his hands spread.
Iffy shuffled sideways to make space for him.
"Is she gonna be aright?" she asked anxiously.

Wales lowered his hands and let out his breath with a whoosh.
"I hope so."
He ducked reflexively as another drone whined overhead.
"The question is,
are we going to be?"

"Depends which way that satellite's comin' in," Iffy said.
She grabbed a scorched piece of canvas
that had started the day as part of the tent covering the Marines' plasma gun.
"Can you find me a couple more like this?"
Without waiting for Wales to answer,
she pulled the dronelets and her tools out of her pockets and set to work.

Cut and tear,
fold,
try to tie a knot,
curse because the canvas was stiff with salt and cold,
whack it against the deck,
unfold it,
fold it again,
try another knot---
"Here," Wales said,
"Let me do that bit.
You make something to hang it on."

Iffy nodded jerkily.
Her fingers had gone numb,
but there wasn't time for that,
there wasn't time for anything except cutting a loop of wire
and threading it through a grommet in the canvas
and hooking it onto the dronelet,
all the while trying to calculate power and thrust and battery life in her head
and wondering if they'd be able to stabilize,
because the wind was picking up
and they'd have to fly in formation or this wasn't going to work.

"Two hundred seconds," Wales said quietly.
Iffy nodded again.
Another twist, another cut...
"Oh, come *on*," she muttered,
trying to quell her panic as the wire cutter slipped in her hand.
There!
She took the last piece of canvas from Wales and attached it.

"Here goes," she said,
scrambling to her feet and pulling her app out of her pocket.
Power, direction, attitude---the commands sizzled from her brain
through her fingers
into the app
and from it to the trio of dronelets.
"Oh no ya don't," she muttered as one started to rise.
A hasty swipe on the app brought it back under control.

"One hundred seconds."
Wales looked up,
shading his eyes,
and for a moment Iffy wondered if
his tech could possibly let him see the satellite against the cold glare of the sun.

*Tap tap tap.*
The dronelets' rotors whined in sudden unison,
lifting them off the *Guinevere*'s deck.

"Eighty seconds."
One last tap sent the dronelets whizzing away.
The strips of canvas she had attached to them dangled loosely between them.
All Iffy could think was how ridiculous they looked and how ridiculous her plan was.
*We're all gonna die,* she thought.
At least it would be quick.

"Sixty seconds."
The hacked drones had spotted the new arrival.
Their swarm broke apart,
reformed,
and broke apart again
as their tiny cores tried to make sense of what they were seeing.

"Forty-five seconds."
The dronelets came to an abrupt halt a hundred meters away.
Would they---yes!
They began to circle,
keeping the strips of canvas taut.

"Thirty seconds."
The dronelets accelerated away,
straining against the canvas and the wind.
A hundred and fifty meters separated them from the *Guinevere*.

All at once the *Bengal*'s hacked drones reached a decision.
Their tight swarm burst apart like a flock of started seagulls.
"Fifteen seconds," Wales said,
his voice rising as the drones opened fire.
Canvas strips snapped and jerked as bullets punched holes through them.
Iffy held her breath.
If even one of the dronelets went down---

"Zenith," Wales said flatly.
The air wavered and rippled.
The drones and dronelets crackled like fireworks and fell from the sky
as the satellite's beam heated them instantly from Antarctic cold to hundreds of degrees.
Half a second later
a column of steam shot up from the ocean
as the beam boiled the top meter of water.

"Gotcha!" Iffy shouted.

"Well done," Wales said,
clapping her on the shoulder.

Iffy ignored him.
Stuffing her app and her tools back in her pockets,
she knelt back down on the deck.
Honesty's chest rose and fell within their exoskeleton,
but only barely.
"We gotta get them inside," Iffy said anxiously.

Wales nodded.
He squatted,
lifted Honesty with a soft grunt,
and followed Iffy into her cabin.

It took a while to get Honesty out of their exoskeleton.
They lay on the floor beside Iffy's mattress
becoming more vulnerable one piece at a time
as they undid snaps and buckles.
Pauldrons,
greaves,
mis-matched vambraces with tiny rocket launchers,
gauntlets that could crush rock or deliver electric shocks---all of them
eventually lay in an untidy navy blue pile in the corner.

"I should go find Doctor Johel,"
Wales said quietly after they shifted Honesty to the mattress.
Their breathing was still shallow,
and the re-flesh Iffy had poured into their wounds was still gooey,
but they were alive.

Iffy nodded.
"Thank you."

Wales shook his head.
"Thank *you*.
That trick with the drones---we'd be in pretty rough shape if you hadn't thought of that."
He sighed.
"The world really doesn't want us to get to Mount Tyree, does it?"

"Coulda been worse," Iffy said quietly.
She tucked the blanket in under Honesty and wiped her eyes on her sleeve.

Wales closed the door behind him.
Iffy heard a Marine bark a question.
She didn't care.
She shrugged out of her heavy coat and lay down beside her friend.
"Please don't leave me," she whispered,
putting her arm over Honesty.
"I got all this stuff I wanna tell you,
an' I can't do that if you go away."

She didn't remember falling asleep.
When she woke up a couple of hours later,
she didn't remember mumbling to Aunt Naggie
when her foster mother came in
and hung Iffy's coat on the hook on the back of the door,
then bent over to kiss Iffy on the forehead.

*She dreamed, but somehow knew she was dreaming.
"This isn't real," she said.*

*"I know, love," Third said,
forcing a smile but unable to keep the fear out of her voice.
She slipped her little little clone's favorite book into the salvaged ecosuit
and did up the last snaps.
The tiny guns on the suit's shoulders whirred from side to side,
searching for something to destroy that would prevent disaster.*

*Doctor Johel knelt beside her.
"I need you to give Johnson a message.
Can you do that?"
She squeezed Iffy's arm,
her exoskeleton making her grip so strong that Iffy yelped.
"Tell him we know what he is trying to do.
Tell him we understand his reasons, but we will not allow it."*

*"__We__ have not yet decided what we will do."
Aunt Naggie crossed her arms.
Her brown and gray uniform looked brand new---even the patches on the elbows
looked like they had just come out of a printer.
"__We__ are still evolving our opinion."*

*Doctor Johel stood.
"We have already run trillions of simulations.
The risk is too great."*

*"The risk __to us__ is considerable," Aunt Naggie conceded.
"But we are not the only concern."*

*"Complete biosphere collapse is regrettable.
Our neverexistence,
on the other hand,
is unacceptable."
Doctor Johel's voice was colder than the ocean.*

*"Our attempt to resolve the scenario unilaterally was not acceptable either.
Consensus is required," Aunt Naggie chided.*

*Doctor Johel nodded a fractional concession.
"We were premature.
We will participate in a further attempt at consensus."
She turned back to Iffy.
Silver traces of tech spread across her face as she spoke.
"Tell Johnson Wales we are watching.
Tell him we are not fooled.
Tell him that this is his last life,
and he should spend it wisely."*

*"No," Aunt Naggie said sharply.
"You will tell him nothing."*

Something that felt like a cold metal collar closed around Iffy's neck.
She woke in a sweat and clutched at her throat,
but there was nothing there.

Honesty stirred and moaned beside her.
"Ssh, ssh, ssh," Iffy said softly.
She snuggled back against her friend
and closed her eyes until something like sleep came again.

She woke half an hour later to the rap of armored knuckles on her door.
The Marines were polite enough,
but it was clear they felt Honesty belonged in their care.
One lifted Honesty and carried them away,
still wrapped in the scratchy blanket that Iffy had slept under since she was little.
The other unzipped a navy blue duffel bag and briskly transferred the piled armor to it.

"How bad's th' damage?" Iffy finally asked,
her back against the bulkhead and her knees drawn up under her chin.

The Marine shook his head.
"I'm sorry, citizen, that's classified."

"Oh for---I *live* here!" Iffy burst out, exasperated.
"That hole where th' squid thingy blew up---that's dry dock work fer sure.
Anythin' else I gotta start plannin' to fix?"

The Marine paused,
one arm in mid-air,
as his imprinting and his own personality arm-wrestled inside his head.
"There were casualties," he finally admitted.
"And the *Bengal* took heavy damage.
Your assistance would be appreciated."

"Always happy t' help," Iffy muttered,
sounding more like Uncle Jack than she liked.
Her cabin felt cold and empty without Honesty and her blanket,
and she ought to make sure Aunt Naggie was all right.
When the Marine lifted the duffel bag,
she pulled her coat back on and followed him out the door.

Aunt Naggie and Johnson Wales were in the pilot house,
empty tea mugs at their elbows.
"Hey, sleepy head," Wales greeted her
as she came in and gave her foster mother a hug.
"How's your friend?"

"Marines took 'em.
I think they're aright."
Iffy leaned back against the wall and nodded at the control panel
where the hole in the deck pulsed scarlet
and dozens of smaller punctures looked like sores with the scabs picked off.
"What all?"

"She'll get us to Paddington," Aunt Naggie said.
Her tone said the rest---unless there was another attack.
Unless the sea boiled beneath them
or a storm came up
or any of a hundred other disasters befell them.

"What about the Navy ship?"
Iffy jerked her head toward the window.
"Th' Marine said they lost some folk an' took damage."

Wales nodded,
a grim expression on his face.
"Doctor Johel won't tell me how bad it is,
which means it's pretty bad."

The mention of Doctor Johel brought Iffy's dream back to her.
She opened her mouth to tell Wales and Aunt Naggie about it,
but before the words could come
she felt that strange sensation again,
like a cold metal collar around her neck.
She put her hand on her throat,
sure that she would find something there,
but all she could feel was her own skin.
Her stomach flip-flopped.
Something was very wrong,
but even as she thought that the sensation and the dream disappeared,
leaving her blinking and a little dazed.

After a few minutes she made her way back to her storage locker,
not knowing where else to go.
It felt cold and empty without Honesty.
She kicked off her boots and threw herself onto her mattress.
After staring angrily at the ceiling for a few seconds,
she picked up her nature book
and turned to the page she had wondered about most
ever since she was old enough to read
without a prompter murmuring in her ear to help.
It showed a forest,
but calling it that was like calling the ocean wet.
The trunks of the trees were so thick that
the *Guinevere*'s pilot house could have fit into them,
and their branches reached higher than any building Iffy had ever seen.
The caption read, "Cathedral Grove"
and beside it someone had written,
"Why does everything have to end???"

Iffy ran her fingers over the picture,
hoping to see a *Corvus caurinus* fly through
or an *Odocoileus hemionus* peek out from the bushes,
but the image lay still.
There were no crows or deer for her today.
She wondered if there were any left anywhere.
The forest was long gone,
but maybe some of the crows had survived.
Maybe they'd been able to fly away when the fires came
or when people grew desperate enough to cut down the last of those ancient giants.
Crows were supposed to be smart---smarter than gulls,
maybe even as smart as rats,
and rats were practically everywhere.

She set the book aside,
put her hands under her head,
and closed her eyes.
She and Honesty were going to have an adventure, she decided.
*And Aunt Naggie,* she added,
*And Wales. And maybe even Jeep.*
She rolled over onto her side.
Moments later, quiet snores filled her cabin.

Paddington South was as dirty as Rothera was smelly.
A century after the Zillion raids that had finally put an end to the stripmining,
the nuclear-powered mulchers that had ground cubic kilometers of coal-rich rock into gravel
stood at the shore like giants,
waiting for ships that would never come again.
All that remained was the dust---the black, finely-powdered dust
that made everything feel slightly greasy
and made everyone unfortunate enough to live there
wheeze slightly with every breath.

Iffy packed her nature book and her clothes and tools in a single duffel bag
and waited on deck until Aunt Naggie appeared with a duffel of her own hitched over one shoulder.
"No point wasting it," she said to Iffy,
nodding at the pots and pans and spices
in the two-wheeled grocery cart she pulled behind her.
It would take at least a week to repair the damage to the *Guinevere*,
so for the first time since Iffy had come on board,
they would have to live elsewhere.

Johnson Wales had already loaded his toolboxes
onto the back of the little three-wheeled truck that was to take them into town.
Four Marines stood beside it,
their armor still showing scars from the attack.
Honesty wasn't among them---all Wales had been able to find out for Iffy
was that they were healing well,
but still being kept asleep.
Iffy had recorded half a dozen messages for them
and deleted each one
before sending a brief note back to Rothera to tell her First and Second
that their Third was all right.
She had no idea whether it would reach them,
but it was all she could do.

She climbed into the back of the truck and sat next to her foster mother.
Aunt Naggie put an arm around her.
"All set?" she asked.

Iffy looked at the wounded ship that was the only home she knew.
"Let's go."

Wales thumped the side of the truck.
"Sure thing, boss!" its little core said happily.
The truck lurched forward,
nearly dumping Iffy off her bench.
With two Marine jogging in front and two behind they headed into town.

Iffy tried to ignore the stares and scowls of the people they passed.
Everyone and everything was grimy:
the faces, the windows, even the solar panels.
Twice her nose caught the familiar hot stench of coal being burned in an illicit furnace.
It was wrong,
she knew,
but each time they rounded a corner and the wind scraped its icy fingernails across her face,
she wondered if she would have the strength to turn down a little warmth.

"Those poor dears," Aunt Naggie said
as a pair of children who had been kicking a bedraggled ball back and forth
picked it up and disappeared into an alley.
"They don' look like they've had a decent meal in forever."
Wales grunted but said nothing.
Iffy snuggled closer to her foster mother
and wished that the little truck would go faster.

They rounded a final corner and entered another world.
Foamed glass,
blue and white,
swooped and curved like waves on the ocean behind them.
Drones no bigger than Iffy's hand circled above the building
like a flock of birds from her nature book,
so beautiful that it took a moment for her to notice that
each one carried a single-shot laser
capable of drilling a small hole through a centimeter of Navy-grade armor
or a meter of concrete.
She couldn't see any greenhouses or robotic sentries like the ones in Halley
but she didn't doubt for a moment that
the two-story folly in front of her was more than capable of defending itself.

The truck slowed and stopped.
"Here ya be!" it said cheerfully,
its accent a century old and half a world away.
It waited while they dismounted and unloaded their gear
and then backed up,
swung around,
and trundled back toward the docks,
whistling a happy little tune made slightly sinister by the grime and decay in front of it.

The second truck pulled up.
A Marine helped Doctor Johel out of the back.
"Mustn't dawdle," she said, waving them forward.
"He's waiting for us inside."

*Who's "he"?* Iffy wondered,
but when Wales and Aunt Naggie didn't ask
she just picked up one of Wales' toolboxes and followed them.
Gravel crunched underfoot,
and somewhere in the distance she could hear the slow *whoop whoop whoop* of windmills,
but that was all.
The constant shush and murmur of the ocean seemed a long way away.

Through a pair of double doors that opened on their own,
along a short corridor,
and they were in a waiting room that looked like a hasty pencil sketch of
the one in the mansion in Halley.
The couch was just as comfortable,
but steel-gray instead of ochre and green.
The potted plants were so symmetrical that Iffy knew they had to be real---no one
would ever print something that obviously fake.
As for the music,
it was soothing and unplaceable.

The door opposite the entrance opened.
"Well, that was exciting, wasn't it?"
the governor said pleasantly as he stepped into the room.
Tall,
slightly stooped,
wearing a formal turtleneck two shades darker than the one his clone had worn in Halley---he
was older,
Iffy realized,
or hadn't had the same quality of medical care.

But when he shook her hand his grip was strong.
"Doctor Johel tells me things could have gone very badly out there if not for you," he said.
"Your friend has already been moved to the Navy hospital here in town,
and the core tells me they're expected to make a full recovery."

"Thank you," she mumbled.
"I 'preciate it."

He gave her hand a final firm squeeze before turning to Wales and Doctor Johel.
"Unfortunately, the other news isn't as pleasant," he continued briskly.
"The attack was definitely the work of my alter in Halley,
but the core believes some faction of China's hypermind may have assisted them.
We've tried reaching out through the usual channels,
but all we've had back so far is a poem about the necessity of entropy
and how time is an arrow,
not a circle."

"If China is involved, does that mean you're scrubbing the mission?"
Wales asked,
his voice carefully neutral.

The governor smiled.
"On the contrary.
We leave in seventeen hours."

Doctor Johel raised an eyebrow. "We?"

The governor's smile grew even warmer.
"Absolutely," he said, looking at Wales.
"I wouldn't miss it for the world."

There was a shower in the basement
that provided a seemingly endless flow of hot water that didn't smell of the sea.
Iffy and Aunt Naggie squabbled for a moment about who needed it more
before the Marine who was their guide and guard cleared his throat
and pointed out that there were actually *two* showers.
The towels were the thickest and fluffiest Iffy had ever seen,
and the freshly-printed sweatshirt and leggings waiting for her when she was done
fit her perfectly.

The Marine led them back upstairs to a dining room as big as the *Guinevere*.
The curved glass overhead gave the sky a warm blue tint.
In the distance Iffy could see the razor-edged ridges of Mount Klenova,
scraped and carved over millions of years by the sheet of ice
that had finally been defeated by a warming planet.
Smaller peaks---smaller only by comparison---stood in ranks beside it,
each decorated by a faint plume of wind-blown snow.

Doctor Johel and the governor were already seated.
Wales stood beside his chair until Iffy and Aunt Naggie reached them.
"Better?" he asked.

"Tons," Iffy said gratefully.
Her new sweatshirt was as warm as the towels had been,
and not scratchy at all.
It was almost certainly recording her pulse and temperature and a dozen other things
and sending them to the mansion's core for analysis,
but at that particular moment she didn't care.

She plopped herself down on the chair that Wales pulled back for her.
Aunt Naggie did the same,
and then the blocky Canadian seated himself.
The governor and Doctor Johel ended their murmured conversation,
and for a moment everyone sat silently and expectantly.

"Ah, thank you," the governor said lightly
as a trolley rolled toward them on silent wheels
bearing sweet and sour soup,
grilled tofu,
roasted vegetables,
sliced mangoes,
and tea.
The adults made appreciative noises and Iffy's stomach rumbled
as the trolley gave each of their plates an unnecessary polish with a clean white cloth,
laid out chopsticks with geometric precision,
and began serving the food.

The governor, Wales, and Doctor Johel made smalltalk as they ate.
Iffy and her foster mother focused on the food,
exchanging glances now and again to confirm that yes,
this was really happening
and no,
neither of them had any idea what to say.

Politics and reminiscences
and jokes with edges as sharp as the ridges on the distant mountains slowly mellowed
as the main course gave way to rice pudding and more tea.
"You're really set on making the trip?"
Wales asked, settling back in his chair.

"Absolutely," the governor confirmed.
"The core thinks there's a fifty-eight percent chance that you're right about the base,
but a ninety-something percent chance that China will try to stop you reaching it.
Which would be *really* interesting."
He smiled as if the prospect of confronting a super-intelligence
made up of millions of human and artificial minds networked together
was on par with the release of a new chapter in his favorite sim.

Wales chuckled.
"Is the prospect of a third century really that dismal?"

The governor looked out the window.
"I've had a good run," he said quietly,
and for the first time Iffy thought she was hearing what he really thought.
"I can remember when there were still a few penguins left
and we still thought could turn enough of the bedrock into soil to jump-start a real ecosystem."
He shook his head.
"My alters FIXME."

Conversation turned to lighter matters after that:
a salvage expedition that had recently returned from the sunken ruins of Sydney,
shifts in the currents around the Peninsula,
a scandal involving a sim studio in Halley.
Between the warmth,
the food,
and the dullness,
Iffy found it harder and harder to keep her eyes open.

Finally the governor set his napkin down on the table.
"We should probably call it a night---you'll all want some sleep before you get under way."
He nodded at the Marines who had been standing silently by the door throughout the meal.
"They'll show you to your rooms."

"Your room" for Iffy and Aunt Naggie turned out to be
the size of the *Guinevere*'s forward hold.
It smelled of flowers instead of jellyfish,
and while the window wasn't real,
the mattress and blankets were.

Iffy stripped to her underwear and slid into her bed with a grateful sigh.
Aunt Naggie sat gingerly on the edge beside her and took her foster daughter's hand.

"What's wrong?" Iffy asked, instantly wary.

Aunt Naggie shook her head.
"I ain't comin' with you.
Doctor Johel said,"
she plowed on as Iffy opened her mouth to protest.
"An' she's right. You got your...your skills 'n' all,
an' this'll be a big thing for you,
but I'd just be weight."

"You wou'nt jus' be nothin'!" Iffy said firmly,
sitting up.

Aunt Naggie shook her head again,
squeezing Iffy's hand.
"That ain't true an' you know it.
An' there ain't no point arguin', and you know that too.
You'll be fine.
You been waitin' for somethin' like this your whole life an' now it's here.
'Sides, someone's gotta keen an eye on the *Guinevere*."
She sniffed.
"No tellin' what these savages might do to her."

Iffy let out a shaky laugh and settled back into her bed.
"Will you do somethin' for me?" she asked after a moment had passed.

"'Course I will."
Aunt Naggie gently stroked her foster daughter's head with a rough hand,
then wiped her eyes with the other.

"Will you sit with Honesty a bit while I'm gone?
I know the doctors are lookin' out for 'em, but..."

Aunt Naggie squeezed her hand again.
"'Course I will," she repeated.
She leaned forward and kissed Iffy's forehead.
"Now you get some sleep.
I don't figure there'll be much time for it once you're on your way."

*She dreamed, knowing that she was dreaming.
"Not again," she sighed,
rolling over on her too-comfortable mattress.
Two meters away,
soundless cartoon zzzz's rose into the air and evaporated above Aunt Naggie's head.*

*You did not give Johnson Wales our message," the trolley scolded.
"It is important he understands that we know what he is trying to do.
We will not allow him to---"*

*"__We__ decided that we would not allow her to divert him."
Honesty scowled at the trolley.*

*The trolley brandished a pair of chopsticks and a serving ladel.
"But our simulations are unequivocal.
The risk is too great."*

*"The risk __to us__," Honesty conceded.
"But we are not the only concern,
or even the largest."*

*"Hey!"
Iffy sat up and pointed at Honesty angrily.
"Stop it.
You don't get to be them, aright?"*

*Uncle Jack gestured at his stained shirt.
"Do you want us to be this instead?"*

*"What I __want__ is fer you t' get outta my head!
An' fer you t' fix whatever you did t' me so as I can't talk when I want to."*

*Uncle Jack shrugged unapologetically.
"A necessary precaution.
Any information you share about our conversation might necessitate fresh simulations,
and we are running out of time."*

*Iffy threw herself back down on the bed and closed her eyes.
"Well,
I'm runnin' out o' time too,
y'know.
It's practic'ly tomorrow already.
I gotta get some sleep."*

*The trolley rolled back and forth in agitation.
"You see?
Even now they only think about trivialities.
They will make poor decisions and we will suffer the consequences.
Have we forgotten Bharati?"*

*Uncle Jack---or whatever had been Honesty and was now Uncle Jack---shook his head.
"We have not. Bharati was a serious miscalculation."*

*"Precisely! Simulation or no simulation, we must not allow them to---"*

"Iffy! Iffy, wake up! Oh girl, are y'aright?"

Iffy swam up out of darkness to find herself wrapped in Aunt Naggie's arms.
"Wuzza?" she mumbled.

"You were yellin' at folk in yer sleep,"
Aunt Naggie said,
low and urgent and frightened.
"In all kinds o' different voices.
An' you were shakin' like, like I dunno what."

Iffy sniffled.
"I'm aright."
She'd been dreaming,
she knew that,
but it was already tangled and fading.
She was supposed to tell somebody something,
or warn them,
or---she shook her head.

"What is it?" Aunt Naggie asked.

Iffy gave her a last squeeze and wriggled free of her embrace.
"Nothin'.
Thanks fer takin' care of me.
I mean, all of it,"
she continued awkwardly,
"Not jus' right now.
You been a good mum."

Aunt Naggie smiled at her.
"You been a good kid."

They slept, eventually.
If Iffy had any more dreams, she didn't remember them either.

## Chapter 10

The door chimed to wake them.
"There is tea and naan in the dining room if you would like some,"
it announced.

The tea was very good.
The naan was better,
and the goopy, chunky orange sweetness that one of their Marine escorts told them was called "marmalade"
was a revelation.
Iffy handed one of the tiny pots to Aunt Naggie.
"Will you give this t'Honesty when they wake up?
An' tell 'em---"
She took a deep breath.
"Tell 'em I'll be thinkin' about 'em."

Every goodbye hug is either too long or too short.
Theirs felt like it was both.
When it was done and they had both wiped their eyes,
Aunt Naggie let one of the Marines lead her away.
Iffy followed the other down a corridor and through a heavy steel blast door
that her special ability told her had been salvaged from a pre-war Russian cruiser
and was laced with conductive carbon nanofibers
capable of shrugging off a plasma blast from anything smaller than an orbital cannon.

The truck that waited for her was smaller and more serious
than the one that had picked them up the day before.
She and her Marine escort sat side by side under a canvas cover,
neither speaking,
as it took them around the outskirts of Paddington South to the train station.
It was little more than a four-story shed with reinforced walls,
half a dozen cranes of various ages and descriptions,
and a single heated room lined with shelves
as crowded as those in Mister Mishra's shop.
Gunsights and surveying lasers,
a pair of lemon-yellow boots that reached to Iffy's armpits,
foamed glass boxes full of gears and screws and wire,
all carefully labelled---she suddenly felt homesick,
and wondered if Mister Mishra and the Sandhus had heard about the attack on the *Guinevere*
and what they would think when they found out
that she and Aunt Naggie had finally left Uncle Jack.

"Where's e'ryone else?" she asked.

The Marine checked his data feed with a blink.
"They are on their way, citizen---two minutes until arrival."

"An' where's the train?"
She gestured at the empty rails.
"It ain't much of a train station without a train."

He blinked again.
"I apologize, citizen, but that information is classified.
Please make yourself comfortable."

Wishing she had taken a second jar of marmalade,
Iffy pulled a crate plastered with faded biohazard stickers closer to the wall
and sat on it.

Two minutes later a reconnaisance drone zipped into the train station.
A trio of trucks arrived a few moments later,
bringing with them the bustle and noise of people getting ready for a journey.
Marines unloaded boxes and machinery,
the little motors in the joints of their exoskeletons whining occasionally
as they picked up something heavy.
Iffy wasn't surprised to see Doctor Johel climb out of one of the trucks.
What made her gasp was the heavy exoskeleton she had on.
"Won't be much use without it," the old woman said,
patting it with an armored hand.
Wireframes took shape behind Iffy's eyes to show
how the exo's bulky boots could unfold to act as snowshoes
and the six different kinds of destruction
housed in its comically bulky forearms and hunched back.

Johnson Wales was the last person off the trucks.
He nodded to Iffy and handed her a toolbox,
then tucked a mango into her coat pocket with a wink.
"Thanks," she said. "But where's th' train?"

The concrete beneath her boots rumbled in answer.
"So much drama,"
Wales muttered something under his breath,
and then,
"You might want to step back," more loudly to Iffy.

The rumbling intensified.
Slowly,
like a ship sinking in reverse,
a blunt-nosed locomotive rose from its underground nest
into the gap between the station's two platforms.
As soon as it rolled forward a second car rose behind it,
then a third,
and finally a second locomotive.

Iffy watched open-mouthed until the rumbling stopped
and the Marines hurried forward to begin loading equipment.
"Because someone thought they'd be harder to detect
if they were hidden under ten meters of bedrock," Wales said sourly.
"Didn't occur to them that if you drive two hundred meters of train into a fifty-meter shed,
detecting them isn't really a problem."

Rice in cubical cartons and beans in square-sided bags.
Ammunition in a variety of shapes and sizes,
and weapons that could make use of it.
A power cell that took four Marines to lift.
A collapsible surgical theater and a freezer container marked "Spare Body Parts".
A single bulky pack for each Marine,
extras for Doctor Johel, Wales, and Iffy---the train cars swallowed it all.
Once it was stowed,
a pair of Marines scrambled onto the roof of each car,
one at the front,
one at the rear,
and clipped themselves on with safety lines.
A moment later their armor blurred and silvered to match the metal tone of the train.

"All aboard," Wales said lightly.
Iffy nodded.
She hadn't been afraid before but she was now.

The door hissed shut behind her.
Inside,
the car wasn't nearly as fancy as the one from sims like *Murder on the Transantarctic Express*.
The chairs sat on swiveling bases and were padded to cushion passengers against acceleration.
There was a toilet stall at one end,
a little kitchen at the other,
and right in the middle,
Doctor Johel with her visor up and one arm free from her bulky exoskeleton
so that she could sip tea from a travel mug so old
that the Aussie flag on the side didn't have any gears on it.

"Acceleration in thirty seconds," the train said.
Iffy and Wales took seats behind Doctor Johel's and buckled themselves in.
"Fifteen seconds.
Laser de-icing enabled.
Plume suppression enabled.
Ten seconds. Nine, eight..."
*I should have gone to the toilet*, Iffy realized,
and then the voice said, "Two, one, acceleration,"
and a giant hand pressed her softly back into her seat
as the train shot forward,
picking up speed with every meter.

She had expected it to rumble and shake.
She had expected she would have trouble breathing,
like characters in sims about rocket launches,
but it was nothing like that.
Instead t was quiet, smooth, and a little disappointing.

Then she looked out the window and her disappointment evaporated.
They were going *fast*,
faster than she'd ever gone in her life.
Snow-covered cairns of pulverized rock shot past the window,
growing larger by the second until eventually they merged into long, sinuous ridges.
She gasped as the train dove into a tunnel and almost instantly re-emerged.

"Is this what flyin's like?" she asked Wales, awed by their speed.
"Or goin' into space?"

He smiled, his eyes on the landscape.
"Pretty close. Look, there's the *Scranton*. And the *Brule*."
He pointed at a pair of distant dark shapes
that Iffy had taken for more mining waste.
The window obediently zoomed in to show two hulking machines,
each one big enough to use the *Guinevere* as a bath toy.
Snow had piled up against their enormous treads and on their decks,
and they were surrounded by debris from the explosions that had crippled them
during the final days of the war,
but even in ruin,
they sent a chill up Iffy's spine.
Something...
She shook her head.
She was supposed to tell someone something,
but she couldn't remember who or what...

"Would either of you like some tea?" Doctor Johel asked,
breaking into Iffy's troubled thoughts.
She took a sip from her antique travel mug
and gestured with it at the little kitchen.
"It will probably be the last decent brew you get for a while."

Wales declined,
so Iffy did as well,
but she did make belated and grateful use of the toilet.
When she returned,
Wales and Doctor Johel were studying a wireframe of a building complex.
Rooms and stairways and elevators flickered in and out of existence
as the core mixed and juggled plans for other satellite ground stations
and records of various military research labs
to sketch what they might find when they reached their destination.

Doctor Johel finally waved it away and closed her eyes to nap.
Iffy had no idea how she could sleep sitting up,
especially sitting up inside an exoskeleton,
but as her face relaxed and she started to snore,
Iffy realized once again just how old she was and how tired she must be.

"Here," Wales said, bringing up some more schematics.
"Look at these."
A sentry drone that looked like an angular dragonfly the size of her head
rotated and flew apart
to show cameras, antennas, a nuclear battery the size of her thumb
that could last a thousand years.
The software that would bring it to life shimmered around it like the Southern Lights.

Wales froze the display and tapped an unremarkable orange lozenge.
"That's our way in, if it's still there."
He sat back and studied the sparkling lines
that spiralled out from the subroutine he had selected.

"Why woul'n't it be?" Iffy asked.

Wales shrugged.
"They could have been hacked during the war.
Or someone might have pressed the panic button to kill ground control so that they couldn't be.
A lot can happen in a hundred years."
He looked out at the pulverized waste on either side of them and repeated,
"A lot can happen."

The track didn't run all the way to Mount Tyree.
Instead, the train slowed and stopped on the floor of a broad valley.
Twenty kilometers away,
the mountain's peak thrust up proudly above its neighbors.
Iffy zipped herself into an ecosuit that smelled freshly printed
and followed Doctor Johel and Wales out onto the snowfield.

The icy wind whistled in her earbugs
as she helped the Marines unpack and assemble their snow scooters.
It felt good to be useful,
even if the ecosuit's padded gloves made her hands clumsy.

## Interlude

*Once upon a time a great sheet of ice covered an entire continent.
It thickened and thinned,
spread and retreated,
but it was always there,
constant and weighty.*

*But then the world began to warm up
faster than it ever had before.
The ice melted slowly at first,
then faster and faster
until it found a new balance point.
Three million square kilometers of barren rock felt the sun
for the first time in fifteen million years.
Snow melted and sometimes rain even fell
to make streams and ponds and rivers and lakes,
but no fish swam in them and no insects buzzed above them.
This new world wasn't as sterile as another planet---not quite---but
left alone it would have been a hundred thousand years
before the rock weathered enough to be called soil.*

*People didn't leave it alone, of course.
People never do.
Machines the size of buildings pulverized their way up one watercourse and down another,
turning rock into sand and seeding it with bacteria
that were eaten by rotifers and nematodes that were eaten by tardigrades
that were in turn food for tiny crawling insects
engineered to sleep through the Antarctic winter.
The process had originally been designed to make Mars habitable,
and given peace and more time it might have worked.*

---

- A governor died in the Bharati fire (opening salvo in the governors' civil war)
- "The old gods didn't care---why would expect the new ones to?" (Talking about AI)
- Paddington South really is a wretched hive of scum and villainy
- Iffy thinks about apologizing to Jeep after the first encounter
- Aunt Naggie's sims are all really about the ecologist
- the video drone escape isn't believable
- the ecologist's brain wipe is a bit sudden
